<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
  <head>
    <meta charset="utf-8" />
    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0" /><meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1" />

    <title>2. Day 0 evening: Meditation Instructions</title>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="_static/pygments.css" />
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="_static/epub.css" />
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="_static/custom.css" /> 
  </head><body>

    <div class="document">
      <div class="documentwrapper">
          <div class="body" role="main">
            
  <section id="day-0-evening-meditation-instructions">
<h1><span class="section-number">2. </span>Day 0 evening: Meditation Instructions</h1>
<iframe width="100%" height="120" src="https://www.mixcloud.com/widget/iframe/?feed=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.mixcloud.com%2Fanthonymarkwell%2F02-8_11_-day-0-b_-first-evening-meditation-instructions%2F&amp;hide_cover=1" frameborder="0"></iframe>
<p>This is our first meditation instructions that we will be giving you this
evening. We’ve mentioned that our meditation technique is known as
<em>satipatthana bhavana</em>. Satipatthana is made up of two words: sati and patthana.
We’re going to have to say much about this word and these practices called
<em>sati</em>
over the coming days. Its regular translation is mindfulness but we use
the word awareness as well interchangeably. Mindfulness and awareness. Its
meaning is attentiveness directed to the present moment. When we’re mindful,  we  are  directing  our  attention  to  whatever  is  occurring  in  the  present
moment. So we’re directing our attention to the present. We are activating
present moment awareness. We are switching it on, we are turning on our
mindfulness.
<em>Patthana</em>
can have two meanings. It means either establishing
or arousing. In its passive sense, it means establishing our awareness in the
present moment or directing our attention in the present moment on to something, on to a foundation. There are four foundations that we will be talking
about. Physical sensations, feelings, emotional states and thoughts – the four
foundations on which mindfulness can be directed. Patthana can also have
an  active  meaning.  It  means  arousing. Arousing  awareness  in  the  present
moment, arousing our attention in the present moment. So satipatthana, that
is what our meditation practice is called.</p>
<p>We  will  be  observing  and  activating  our  awareness  in  the  present
<span class="pdfpage">16</span>  moment on the very fast flowing range of objects. We will be starting with
the physical sensations in the body, because they’re a little bit slower, a little
bit grosser and easier to see. We will be transitioning in our meditation practice  so  that  we  can  watch  feeling,  pleasant  and  unpleasant  and  emotional
states and our thought patterns as well.
<em>Bhavana</em>
means mind development,
mind cultivation or mind training.</p>
<p>So establishing mindfulness in the present moment on one of the four
foundations of mindfulness – that’s what we are doing here this week. And
your ability to establish your awareness in the present moment on whatever
object is arising will lead you to see that object as it really is. We see things
as they really are. And this is what is meant by clear seeing or
<em>Vipassana</em>. <em>Vi-passana</em>. <em>Pass</em> means to see. <em>Ana</em> means it is a noun.
<em>Vi</em> is an intensifying
prefix. We are seeing things really clearly. We are seeing things so well, that
the mind disengages, stops identifying with it, stops taking it as me, being
for me or happening to me or as mine or as being I and let’s it go. We have
clearly seen that object.</p>
<p>So satipatthana is the cause, Vipassana is the result. We establish our
awareness in the present moment on one of the four foundations of mindfulness and that allows Vipassana to occur, clear seeing to occur.</p>
<p>And what is it that we’re having insight into? We’re observing not only
the contents of our mind, but we’re observing the structure of our mind. We
are seeing that all objects arise and pass away, but in particular all objects
also have certain particular characteristics. They’re all impermanent, they’re
all  relatively  unsatisfactory,  in  relation  to  the  unconditioned  element  and
they’re all non-self. They don’t belong to anybody. It’s all impersonal. It’s an
impersonal flow that is going on.</p>
<p>When we see the structure of our experience in this way, it allows us to
let go of things. The sense of self is let go surely and gradually. Thoughts of
me, mine and I become less and eventually this leads to the complete cessation of being. The complete cessation of suffering. And that’s an experience
the Buddha called nirvana – that cessation of dukkha.</p>
<p>Tonight, so that we can begin our practice, we have divided our instructions into three parts.</p>
<p>First of all we will be having a look at the practice of virtue, because
<span class="pdfpage">17</span>  it’s  one  of  the  major  conditions  that  we  need  to  put  in  place.  We  will  be
having  a  look  at  our  sitting  meditation  and  also  our  walking  meditation.
These instructions are for the formal sitting and walking periods. The practice of virtue is all day everyday whilst we’re on the retreat. So be continuous in your mindfulness and practice throughout the day in order for Vipassana knowledge to unfold. As I said this afternoon, these Vipassana insights
that  arise  from  satipatthana  meditation  are  conditioned.  Conditioned  by
satipatthana. Conditioned by your ability to maintain your awareness in the
present moment, to maintain your awareness internally, and your ability to
continuously do this over and over again over a period of time. When these
conditions are in place, the results start to flow naturally. As I said, there is
nothing you can do to stop them from unfolding naturally in the mind.</p>
<section id="sila">
<h2><span class="section-number">2.1. </span>Sila</h2>
<p>The  practice  of  sila  or  virtue  begins  with  abstaining  from  unwholesome  verbal  and  physical  actions. The  most  gross  of  our  three  intentional
doorways we have through body, speech and mind and our virtue practice
will be to moderate our verbal actions and our physical actions. Purification
of virtue is said by the Buddha to be the base upon which all other meditative practices are based. So if you are sincere in your effort and you wish to
have the experience of insight, it is well recommended to you to maintain
virtue. Tonight I’m not going to give you a sermon on morality but since the
success of your meditation practice is conditioned by the practice of virtue,
it’s worth taking note of these things. Of the noble eightfold path, the third,
fourth and fifth factors are all concerned with virtue. So three out of eight
factors of the noble eightfold path are to do with sila or morality.</p>
<p>The first one is called
<em>samma vaca,</em>
meaning right speech. Basically we
are abstaining or stopping four types of unwholesome speech occurring. Of
course in the retreat you’re all in silence. So this one is pretty much covered.
For the sake of completeness we avoid telling lies to others. We avoid hard,
rude  speech  to  others.  We  avoid  back  stabbing  others,  that  means  talking
about somebody to someone else in the hope that your opinion of that person
will be conveyed to another person. The fourth one is gossiping.</p>
<p>The fourth factor of the noble eight fold path,
<em>samma kammanta</em>
means
<span class="pdfpage">18</span>  right action. We abstain from three types of particular actions. We don’t kill
anything,  we  don’t  steal  anything  or  take  something  which  has  not  been
given  to  us  and  we  abstain  from  sexual  misconduct.  Sexual  misconduct
means relations with people that are inappropriate for us to have sexual relations with, whether they are people who are minors, or younger or children,
whether they are people who are already in a relationship. Or even the kind
of  activity  like  raping  somebody.  This  is  all  sexual  misconduct. Adultery
where taking someone’s husband or wife and having sexual relations with
them. This is something that is very harmful for the other partner unless they
have of course some agreement between themselves.</p>
<p>The  fifth  factor  is
<em>samma  ajiva</em>
or  right  livelihood.  It  means  earning
a living without harming anybody else. Having a right livelihood, having a
livelihood which is beneficial for other beings. Specifically we avoid trading
in things like guns or poisons or drugs or intoxicants. We try to make sure
we don’t sell flesh from animals. We don’t make it to our business to be killing beings or taking unfairly the resources from other beings using them for
ourselves or profiting by them for ourselves.</p>
<p>So  we  are  practicing  right  speech,  right  action  and  right  livelihood
whilst we’re on the retreat here. This is a very firm base on which we can
practice our meditation.</p>
<p>Whilst we’re on the retreat here, we will be following what is known as
the eight precepts. In the morning we will chant the eight precepts. Basically
they are no killing, no stealing, no lying, abstaining from sexual intercourse,
abstaining from drugs and alcohol and abstaining from high and luxurious
seats  and  beddings,  abstaining  from  eating  in  the  afternoon  and  not  using
any jewelry or flowers or trying to look fancy in any way, not listening to
music or watching any shows.</p>
<p>An additional rule is not to speak with contempt about somebody who
has already attained the noble eight fold path, somebody who has already
become enlightened. You should be careful about this. This can disturb your
meditation practice, maybe not in the beginning but later on, if ever you have
said something detrimental or something negative about somebody who has
become enlightened. You should make an apology – just in your own mind
and  then  forgive  yourself  for  making  that  mistake.  That  can  clear  certain
<span class="pdfpage">19</span>  blockages away.</p>
</section>
<section id="sitting-meditation">
<h2><span class="section-number">2.2. </span>Sitting meditation</h2>
<p>How do we do the sitting meditation? First of all we’re going to start to
have a look at the position. When we’re sitting in meditation we need to try
to be as comfortable as possible. We want to be comfortable for at least 45
minutes. That can be quite difficult in the beginning stages. When you’ve sat
for a full session, you feel very much invigorated. You feel like you’ve been
successful and you will find that you can sit for 45 minutes again and again
and again once you have broken through that limit.</p>
<p>What I’m going to show you now is a few of the sitting postures.
The most simple of them is just the cross legged position. It’s called
sukhasana. Happy posture if you like. The problem with this posture is that
all your weight will be distributed on to very small areas around your ankles
and on to the sit bones. So after a while it becomes quite painful.</p>
<p>The second posture that we use as well is called the quarter lotus. That’s
done by putting your foot up on the calf of the other leg. Normally, we put
the left leg under the right leg. But other traditions have other styles. If your
legs are not properly stretched, you will find some tension points underneath
because there’s not a great deal of flatness.</p>
<p>Then we have what is know as the half lotus. Half lotus is the posture
I like to sit in personally. We take the sole of our foot and tuck it into our
groin. Nice and close and then you put the sole of your foot on the inside of
your thigh. Your leg is kind of turned over a little bit that your anklebone is
not even touching the floor. It’s kind of tucked under. All the weight is along
this shinbone. So it’s a nice and continuous flat surface that doesn’t have any
pressure points.</p>
<p>Another  very  comfortable  posture  is  the  posture  that  the  Burmese
monks and nuns like to take. It starts with the same thing, sole running on
the inside of this thigh and then instead of putting it up on the thigh, leave it
in front. That’s the most comfortable one. The most important thing is that
you are flat and comfortable.</p>
<p>Those who want to get the little fancy can try to do the full lotus posture.  Quite  uncomfortable,  quite  painful  for  most  people.  You  can  get  it
<span class="pdfpage">20</span>  going  for  a  few  minutes  and  after  that  it  starts  to  become  uncomfortable.
You can try to sit in the shallow water on the beach whilst you’re here on the
island. Gravity in the water is a little bit different.</p>
<p>We mentioned this afternoon the numbness in the legs, which can quite
often happen if we are leaning over our legs. So make sure that your back
is up straight. If you start leaning forward, all the weight will go down on
your legs and you start to get numb. If you find that you’re getting a little bit
numb, you can try just to leaning back a little bit. For a minute or two you
just lean back and take away the weight of your legs. We don’t want to be
tense with our back. We are not trying to stretch the head and touch the roof,
but we’re not leaning over either. You just want to be with a straight spine up
in a row allowing the spine and skeleton to support the weight of the body
rather than trying to use your muscles. In that way the breath can flow in and
out quite comfortably.</p>
<p>Where do we keep our hands? I like to keep my right hand on top of the
left and allow the thumbs to touch a little bit sometimes. If that becomes a
little bit too warm for you, you can move your hands and put them half way.
You can even spread your fingers a little bit. So they just sit down there in the
lap in a comfortable position. Some people like to put their hands on their
knees. That’s fine as well. That can be nice and stable as well. Just be careful
when you start to put your hands on your knees, it doesn’t make you start
leaning forward. And then your legs might become numb and your breathing
won’t be flowing as smoothly as it could be. Hands on the knees is fine or
even half way down on the thighs as well is fine.</p>
<p>As far as your eyes are concerned, you can keep your eyes open or you
can keep them closed or you can do a bit of both. Most people will meditate
with their eyes closed. But also meditating with the eyes open is very, very
effective. There’s nothing to stop us to come into the present with the eyes
open. In fact, as our practice develops, you’ll be meditating with your eyes
open  more  and  more.  Especially  in  our  daily  life,  we  have  our  eyes  open
most of the time when we are awake. So you can start keeping your eyes
open, but eventually they will close down when you become more and more
concentrated. – Just lightly close your eyes. As beginners, we often want to
see things with our eyes in the meditation, however, meditation is not carried
<span class="pdfpage">21</span>  out by the eyes. It’s carried out by the mind. We are trying to see with the
mind. – Try to let the eyes go. I know it’s a place where consciousness very
often arises. It arises at the eye door. It arises at the ear door. Continuously,
over  and  over  again.  Consciousness  is  used  to  being  in  these  areas  of  the
body process. – So in our practice, we try to resist the urge to use the eyes
all the time in our meditation.</p>
<p>That’s the preliminary instruction. You’re setting yourself up, the posture. We want to be able to maintain this sitting for at least 45 minutes. If
during  the  sitting,  it  becomes  extremely  painful,  of  course,  you  can  move
your legs a little bit. When I started to sit in meditation, it was extremely
painful. I started by lightening an incense stick which burns for 45 minutes.
I started  sitting for 15 minutes cross legged, and then I moved by putting
my leg on the side, and do that for another 15 minutes, and then when that
became too painful I put my legs to the other side. And that was the first few
months of my meditation practice.</p>
<p>If you find that it is really, really uncomfortable, just stand up. You can
stand up for a few minutes and then sit back down again. Just because you
are changing postures from sitting to standing to sitting, it doesn’t mean that
your meditation has to stop at all. Your meditation can continue in the present moment as you change your body.</p>
<p>We learn to meditate by sitting as still as possible because it’s easier.
Once  you  have  the  hang  on  it,  we  don’t  need  to  meditate  in  a  still  sitting
position. We can meditate throughout the day in anyone of the four postures,
walking, standing, sitting, lying down, and in fact, in any of the other postures we get the body in when we’re doing other activities.</p>
</section>
<section id="first-stage-internalizing-awareness-letting-go-of-past-and-future">
<h2><span class="section-number">2.3. </span>First stage: Internalizing awareness – letting go of past and future</h2>
<p>So let’s have a look at our sitting meditation now with the first step.
We have established our body, found a comfortable position to sit in. What’s
the first thing we do? We start paying attention to the present moment. This
is the beginning of our mind development. We are gathering the mind into
the present moment. It likes to wander into the past and future. We are just
bringing it back and internalizing our awareness. We do this continuously
<span class="pdfpage">22</span>  the first few moments of our meditation sitting. The first minute, at least, this
should be your only object. Don’t come into the hall and start immediately
watching your breath. You need to establish your awareness in the present
moment  and  you  need  to  internalize  your  awareness.  So  our  first  step  is
continuously directing the mind to the now. And just hold it with that as the
object now. Just being aware of now. Present. Present. Just keep directing
the mind bringing it into the center. Again and again. If it wanders off, don’t
be upset. We just bring it back and start again. Be aware when thoughts arise
of the past – memory, or of the future – planning, and bring yourself back
into the present. If your mind goes into the past or future, stop it quickly.
Be aware and alert that you’ve just exited meditation and you’re just sitting
on the floor in a hall on a mountain, no longer meditating. You’re engaging
in your thoughts. You’re no longer present, you’re no longer here. So bring
yourself back to the present. Many will find that this is a major part of their
meditation practice for the first few days that they are here. – This is the first
stage in letting go. We are letting go of the past and future, we are coming
into the present.</p>
</section>
<section id="second-stage-feeling-body-sensation-letting-go-of-the-body">
<h2><span class="section-number">2.4. </span>Second  stage:  Feeling  body  sensation  –  letting  go  of  the body</h2>
<p>Once  you’ve  been  able  to  do  that,  then  we  direct  our  attention  internally. We direct this present moment awareness, we have established in the
first  minute  and  bring  it  inside.  We  climb  inside  the  body.  We  direct  our
awareness to become aware of the whole body as it is sitting on our mat. Do
you become aware of how it feels like? What does the sensation of a whole
body  feel  like?  Bring  your  mind  in,  be  actually  inside  your  body.  Climb
inside it. If you can’t catch the whole body posture of sitting at once, start at
the top and know what the top half of your body feels like and then become
aware of the bottom half of the body. Become aware if there is something
sitting on the mat. There is something sitting on the mat and it’s breathing!
So climb inside and feel what it’s like to actually have that sensation of a
whole body sitting there. Start from the top, work your way down. You can
even move through your body, if that helps. We’re directing our attention to
the sensation of the whole mass of the body as it is sitting there.</p>
<p><span class="pdfpage">23</span>  How do you know that you have a body when your eyes are closed?
How do you know it’s there? Just examining that. Can you feel that there is
something sitting on the mat? You can’t see it when your eyes are closed and
you can’t smell it and you’ve stopped thinking about it. Conceptually you can
create an image of your body in your mind, so you can perceive the body.
We can perceive the body through the eye door. We can perceive the body
through the mind door as a concept. We can even smell the body. We can
hear it, making sounds. So there’s many different ways to perceive the body.
But what we are interested in here, is perceiving the body through the body
door itself. Through the skin! Through the internal sensations of the whole
thing. We are not looking at the body, we are not hearing the body, smelling
or even licking the body. We want to experience the body through the sense
door of touch.</p>
<p>So this is the second object of our meditation practice. And we do this
for the second minute of each sitting. Some people will experience the sensation of the body as being all around them. Some people will have the experience  being  aware  of  the  body  from  some  viewpoint  up  on  the  shoulders
somewhere. We are not trying to picture the body, to create a mind image of
the body, of what you think the body looks like when you’re sitting on the
mat. That’s not the object we’re doing here. The object is just the sensation
of the whole thing as it’s sitting here. It’s a very subtle physical sensation.
You can move your mind in and out, up and down. You can move it, you can
feel it. This sensation is there. We are observing the whole body.</p>
<p>First, we let go of the past and the future and we stick with the present.
Secondly, we let go of the external world and we are focusing on the internal
world. This is the second stage of letting go. Our meditation practice is letting go only. How far, how much can you let go of in the present moment.
If you’re noticing and identifying that you are attaching with something, let
it go. Our practice is only about letting go.
<em>The Buddha’s teaching is only about letting go.</em>
Letting go of the idea that you have a personality, that you
are a self. In fact, enlightenment takes place, when you have completely let
go of the sense of self. That is what we are aiming for. First we’re going to
let go of the past and future, we are going to let go of the external world,
and then we’re going to start to let go of the physical body. And then we are
<span class="pdfpage">24</span>  going to let go of the mental states as well. When we have let go of everything, when there’s nothing left to let go of, the mind experiences that which
is beyond conditioned realm. It experiences the unconditioned.</p>
</section>
<section id="third-stage-using-the-breath-to-maintain-awareness">
<h2><span class="section-number">2.5. </span>Third stage: Using the breath to maintain awareness</h2>
<p>The third stage of our meditation practice is to start paying attention to
the breath. We start to become aware that the breath is flowing in through the
nostrils, down through the body to the abdomen. The breath is flowing in and
the breath is flowing out. We are going to use the breath, that occurs many
times a minute, 12 times in and 12 times out, if you are a regular breather.
Sometimes it’s faster, sometimes it’s slower. We are going to be using this
flow of the breath as a concept to maintain awareness in the present moment.
We are using the breath! As a conceptual structure to maintain our awareness
in the present moment. What we are really looking to paying attention to,
though, is the physical sensations that are created by the breath that flows in
and out of the body. This practice is called
<em>chatu dhatu bhavana manasikara</em>,
which  means  paying  attention  to  the  four  elements.  The  four  elements  is
what makes up this body. This physical mass that is sitting here, it’s a combination of six elements, actually. We are going to use four of them for our
meditation practice in the beginning days. We can cover the other elements
later. So what we are directing our attention to is the physical sensations created by four of those elements. We normally just refer to them in English as
earth, water, fire and air.</p>
</section>
<section id="the-four-elements">
<h2><span class="section-number">2.6. </span>The four elements</h2>
<p>The body is made up of these four physical elements. Don’t take those
words literally. Don’t think of a handful of earth, a glass of water, or a mouth
full of breath. That’s not what we are talking about here. This is very different from what those words mean. So don’t get lost in the translation.</p>
<p>All along the breath path, as the breath flows in and as the breath flows
out, various physical sensations will take place. Some of the sensations will
be  around  the  nose  area,  some  of  them  will  be  around  the  throat  area,  or
around the heart area, some of them will be down in the abdomen. It’s possible  to  feel  the  breath  right  up  through  the  head  and  right  away  through
<span class="pdfpage">25</span>  the body down to the legs. The anatomists and physiologist tell us, that the
breath is coming from the nose into the lungs and it does come out again
without going any further than the lungs. That may well be true. What we’re
actually interested in, however, is the sensations created by the breath as it
flows in and out. And the physical sensations go further than the lungs. The
physical  sensations  flow  right  away  through  the  body.  In  fact,  when  your
lungs expand, your diaphragm gets pushed down and your stomach moves
out. So the oxygen exchange is happening in the lungs. The physical sensations  that  the  breath  creates  are  happening  throughout  the  body. And  this
is our main object of meditation in the first days of practice. The physical
sensations that are created by the breath.</p>
<p>These physical sensations are the characteristics of the four elements.
They are the manifestation of the four elements. Those four elements in Pali
are
<em>pruṭhavī,  āpa,  teja  and  vāyu</em>.
Earth,  water,  fire  and  air.  We  can  think
about them in various ways.</p>
<ul class="simple">
<li><p>The earth element is really the element of extension. It’s the element
of solidity. Anything that is solid within this mind and body process
sitting  here,  whether  the  bones  or  flesh  or  the  ligaments  or  the  skin,
they’re  all  solid  things. There  is  a  certain  solidity  to  our  body.  It’s  a
base. It’s something real. My one weighs about 90 kg at the moment.
It’s a solid mass of stuff. This is just a foundation for the other elements
to play in.</p></li>
<li><p>There is also the fire element. The fire element is just the element of
temperature. This body does have a temperature aspect to it. 37 or 38°.
Sometimes it feels very warm, sometimes it feels very cold which may
be just a temperature fluctuation of half a degree or so. But the fact that
this  thing  has  any  temperature  aspect  to  it  at  all,  means  that  the  fire
element is there.</p></li>
<li><p>There is also the air element which manifests in many different ways.
It  manifests  as  the  breath  and  it  manifests  in  other  various  ways  as
well. As  pressures  and  tensions,  tingling  and  vibrations. The  air  element is flowing throughout the body. The air element is not restricting
itself to the nose, the lungs and back again. It’s the energies that flow
throughout the body. Different traditions will have different names for
<span class="pdfpage">26</span>
the air element. In the Chinese tradition it’s known as chi. In the Indian
tradition  it’s  known  as  prana.  In  this  Pali  tradition  it’s  referred  to  as
<em>vāyu</em>
. This is the element of forces. There are those various forces that
are happening in the body. It’s the air element that activates the body
and moves it from here and there. The solidity and the fire get pushed
around by the air element combining together.</p></li>
<li><p>These three elements would be completely separate from each other,
if there wasn’t for the water element. The water element is the element
that  combines  these  things  together.  The  solid  base,  the  temperature
and the energies and forces, that are moving throughout the body, are
all held together into a unit, compacted into a body that we call mine,
my  body.  So  the  water  element  is  cohesive.  Now  just  imagine  when
you  are  making  some  bread,  you  put  some  flour  which  is  a  powder,
some salt which is a powder, some yeast which is a powder in a metal
bowl  and  spin  them  around.  So  these  three  ingredients  are  there  but
they’re just powder in a bowl. As soon as you start to add some water
to it, it starts to come together to a dough, into a solid mass. Well, this
is what our body is. It’s a combination of the earth element, the fire element, the air element and the water element.</p></li>
<li><p>There’s also the space element,
<em>akasa</em>. It’s also there. It’s very subtle.
It’s a different type of meditation practice, but it’s there. We are concentrating on the four elements when we are investigating the body.</p></li>
</ul>
<p>These four elements can manifest in different ways. They manifest as
different physical sensations. An element can either be strong or weak and
they are always fluctuating, always flowing.</p>
<p>If the fire element becomes stronger, then the body becomes warm. If
the fire element and gets weak, then the body becomes cool. There’s a sensation of coldness. The fire element has a weak aspect and a strong aspect. The
other elements are the same as well.</p>
<p>If the earth element manifests in a strong way, it will be manifesting
as hardness, roughness and heaviness. It’s like your teeth are hard and solid.
Your fingernails are hard and solid. There’s kind of a roughness if you run
your  hand  through  your  hair  if  your  hair  is  short.  The  earth  element  can
also manifest in a weak manner. It can manifest as softness, smoothness and
<span class="pdfpage">27</span>  lightness.  Touch  your  lips  with  your  tongue.  There  is  softness  there.  The
earth element has two aspects to it. It can be either weak or strong. How its
characteristics are manifesting, will give you different physical sensations.
Hardness, roughness, heaviness, softness, smoothness, lightness. The same
thing,  they  are  all  the  earth  element  and  they  will  be  manifesting  in  your
body continuously. Sometimes the body feels hard, sometimes it feels soft,
sometimes  it  feels  very  heavy,  sometimes  it  feels  very  light.  It’s  the  earth
element playing around.</p>
<p>The  air  element,  which  we  will  be  focusing  on  a  lot  this  week,  the
breath  in  particular  as  it  flows  in  and  out  and  the  abdomen  as  it  rises  and
falls, displays many different physical sensations. If the breath is fast, then
the physical sensations will be pushing and pressure and resistance. If the
breath is long and smooth and calm, you will get those smooth and comfortable sensations. You’ll feel gliding, you’ll feel flowing. So depending on how
you are breathing, different physical sensations will start to manifest. When
the air element manifests at full strength, it will appear as forces rising up,
from near the buttocks’ area and forcing up your back. Pushing, supporting
your whole back. You feel the energy keeping the body erect. If it wasn’t for
that air element, the body would just collapse on the floor. It’s the air element
constantly flowing up through the back around and up. It’s consistently flowing. Our arms extending and bending, it’s all the air element.</p>
<p>We’ll be watching out for these physical sensations as our meditation
unfolds. In fact, this is the main object of our meditation practice. To become
aware,  to  fully  understand,  to  clearly  see  the  physical  body.  The  physical
body needs to be let go of. We’ve been attaching and identifying with it too
long already. It has caused a lot of troubles when we attach and identify with
the body. So this meditation is to allow us to see the body as it really is. We
see  the  nature  of  the  body  and  will  be  able  to  let  go  the  body.  Letting  go
means not identifying with the body.</p>
<p>Our meditation practice will transition. We will start to use the breath.
It flows in and it flows out. This is a conceptual framework that we follow.
What we are really interested in, however, are the physical sensations created by the breath. I want you to pay particular attention to three areas as
the  breath  is  flowing  in  and  flowing  out.  In  particular  I  want  you  to  pay
<span class="pdfpage">28</span>  attention to the nostril area, the area around the upper lip. Can you feel the
breath flowing in? Is there a physical sensation of touching? Can you feel the
warmth as it comes out, the coolness as it goes in? Can you feel the vibration
that is occurring? Vibrating, it’s the air element. Warmth or coolness, that’s
the fire element. Touching sensation, that’s the earth element. Can you feel
it  flowing  down  through  the  body?  So  we  are  following  it  all  through  the
body. We are really only interested in the physical sensations created by the
breath. We are not interested in the images or little maps, that you create for
yourself of the body.</p>
<p>As  it  flows  down  to  the  chest,  you  feel  some  rubbing  or  some  gliding. And then I want you all to pay particular attention to the abdomen as it
rises and falls. You breathe in, the abdomen rises. There’s a certain physical
sensations that occurs there. As the abdomen falls, there’s a certain physical
sensation as well. In fact, there are many different physical sensations. Pushing,  twisting,  pressure,  vibration,  tingling,  throbbing. All  those  sensations
are there for you to pay attention to.</p>
<p>These physical sensations are not the four elements themselves. These
physical sensations are the manifestation of the four elements. We are going
to be bringing ourselves into the present moment, internalizing our awareness, then we start paying attention to the breath as it flows from the nose to
the abdomen, and from the abdomen to the nose. We are using this concept
of the breath to get in touch with the physical sensations. And we’re going to
do this continuously over and over again.</p>
<p>We can give you an example of the type of knowledge that arises when
we start to watch this way. First of all we are looking at a conceptual thing.
And  then  we  are  looking  at  physical  sensations. And  then  we  will  breakthrough  and  we  will  see  the  actual  elements  themselves.  But  this  doesn’t
happen automatically. We will give you an example of the car down there
in the carpark. If someone was to ask you, «so what is it that is sitting there
in the carpark?» Our first reaction is, «it’s a pick-up, or it’s a Toyota or it’s a
car.» That is a conceptual answer. Yes, there is a general thing there that we
call a car. If we look a little bit closer, however, we will start to see actually,
what we call car is just a conceptual idea. It’s actually made up of car parts.
As we try to describe what it is, «well, there is some wheels, there is some
<span class="pdfpage">29</span>  doors, there’s a bonnet, there’s a tailgate, there’s an engine». It’s actually not
a car that is sitting there. It’s just an arrangement of car parts. Parts have been
arranged in a particular way and so it produces this image of car. That’s what
we  are  normally  used  to  dealing  with  –  concepts! We  don’t  normally  deal
with ultimate realities. If they keep asking you, «well, what’s really there?»
What is really in the carpark? When you really examine what is sitting there
in the carpark, you will find out it is just metal, just glass, rubber and plastic. You will see the car in that way. So our perceptions can change in the
way that we see things. We are used to see the body as a conceptual thing.
As being my body. We are going to start to have a look at it a little bit more
closely.  We  will  start  to  observe,  okay,  let’s  make  our  mind  present,  let’s
internalize our awareness, and let’s really have a good look and see and find
out what this body is. We come to an understanding of the four elements by
going through the physical sensations created by the breath. The breath sensations contain all the four elements. The elements change and the way that
we can perceive their change is through the physical sensations that make
up the body.
<em>In fact, the body is nothing other than these physical sensations</em>
<em>and our concepts that we paint on top of it.</em>
So that’s what is actually happening in real-time. There is the real things, your physical sensations created by
the four elements and then there is what you paint on top. Your conceptual
notions of yourself, what you believe you are. Whether you believe it’s a man
or a woman, or it believes it’s this nationality or that nationality. Whether it
believes, it’s a smart person or a stupid person. Whether it believes it’s rich
or poor. Funny or serious. It’s painted all these different things on top of it.
We’re going to strip off all those concepts that you painted on yourself and
we just want to have a look and see actually what the body is. And this is
what our meditation practice starts with.</p>
<p>In order for us to break through and really see these elements as they
really are, we will need to pay attention continuously to the present moment.
Being able to pay attention to the present moment, means we need an object
which is continuously there. The breath is such an object. It arises, stays for
a while and ceases. So when we begin practicing mindfulness of breathing,
we are aware of the breath as it comes in, and we are aware of the breath as
it goes out. We are aware at the beginning of the breath, we are aware of the
<span class="pdfpage">30</span>  breath as it flows, we are aware of the breath as it finishes. Three things to
pay attention to. When it first starts, as it continues and when it finishes. And
then there’s a little gap. And then it starts, continues and finishes. And then
there’s a little gap. You can pay attention to all of those things.</p>
<p>There are many advantages of watching the abdomen rising and falling. Make an effort to follow the breath down, and follow the breath up. We
will do this for the first day of our meditation practice. Keeping ourselves in
the present, keeping ourselves internally, following this concept of a breath
coming in and out. If we can follow the breath in and out, make the mind
continuous,  then  it  starts  to  stabilize.  It  starts  to  concentrate. The  concentrated mind allows us to see beyond the physical sensations. We really see
the elements themselves. And that is something that you will breakthrough
in time. But you will need to be continuous.
<em>Continuity is the secret of success in meditation practice.</em></p>
<p>In the old days, they used to make fire by rubbing two sticks together.
If you try to rub two sticks together, you can do it for 10 minutes and stop
for five minutes and do it again for 10 minutes. If you do that, you will get
very tired and there will be no smoke or even flame, even any kind of fire
produced. Because when you’re working and stop, it cools down again. You
work  and  it  cools  down  again.  Just  stopping  and  starting.  Our  meditation
practice is exactly the same. You will need to be continuous in your efforts
and then eventually you will make some fire. If you can be continues for half
an hour, you will be able to make fire. If you start for five minutes and stop
for five minutes, you can do that for 30 years and you still never get a fire!
The  stop  and  start  method  doesn’t  work,  it  doesn’t  produce  any  fire.  Even
after many, many years of practicing. But after just 30 minutes of continuous application, it starts! So continuity is the secret of meditation practice.
You will need to resist any urge that the mind has for going at delighting in
some kind of objects. Delighting in the past, in the future, in the present at
the sense doors. That is when the mind is going out, that is when the sticks
have stopped rubbing. To reactivate your sticks, bring your mind back into
the present moment and internalize your awareness. Notice every time your
mind wanders away from the breath and bring it back as quickly as you can.
Do not entertain any thoughts. Do not entertain, «oh, I should be meditating.
<span class="pdfpage">31</span>  I just want to think this story out a little bit. Just let that think a little bit and
then I will do my meditation.» That is wasting your time here! And this is
precious time! Only seven days that we can practice with full intensity.</p>
<p>So please try to maintain your awareness of the breath continuously as
it is flowing in and out. We are paying attention right at the beginning.</p>
<p>In fact, you can follow it all the way through and at the end of the inbreath, you can just say, «now», if you want to. Bring yourself back to the
present. At the end of every out-breath you can bring yourself back to the
present. You can do this over and over again. Be aware it is starting, finishing, now. Exiting, finishing, now. You keep bringing yourself back into the
present  moment,  observing  what  is  exactly  there.  Not  what  you’re  imaging to be there, not what you like to be there but just seeing what is there
over and over again. We are training the mind. We are narrowing the place
where we allow it to run. We allow it to run just into certain objects, certain
places. We are following the breath as continuously as we can, noting when
it goes in, we know that it’s going in. When it’s coming out, we know that
it’s  coming  out.  If  we  notice  any  physical  sensations  as  we  are  following
the breath, we pay attention to them. We can make a little note of them. ’In,
out’, if you feel the expansion in your chest, make a little note to yourself
‘expanding’. If you feel the pushing, make a note to yourself ‘pushing’. This
is the real life experience that you are experiencing. This is the real thing.
There is actually a physical sensation taking place in the present moment.
This is what we want to come to understand. We want to put ourselves in a
position, where we can watch so clearly and so closely the present moment,
that whatever physical sensation arises, we know it. We know exactly what it
is and we see it clearly for what it is. In this way we won’t attach to the body.
We will be able to let go of the body.</p>
<p>Normally, the elements will be nicely balanced. 25, 25, 25, 25%. Occasionally one of the elements will become unbalanced. The earth element will
become 40%, the other three will be 20, 20, 20%. At that time you will feel
that the body becomes hard. There will be some hardness there. So the whole
body is becoming hard. Maybe the fire element becomes unbalanced. You
will feel warmth. So the four elements are always adjusting in ratios and the
four elements are manifesting in the present moment as sensations in your
<span class="pdfpage">32</span>  body according to those ratios. We want to come to understand those physical sensations.</p>
<p>We are going to follow the breath that comes in. When it finishes, we
know that it’s finished. This is very important. As soon as one breath finishes,
tick the box, done. And then follow the next breath. One by one. We don’t
want to get ahead of ourselves. We don’t want to be thinking, «I’m going to
meditate for two hours now. I’m going to watch the breath, every single one
or even for the next 45 minutes». Just try to do it for that breath, that’s occurring right now. Just follow one breath successful, and then follow another
breath. Successful of one, follow another breath. Until you start to follow
the breath more closely. In the beginning stages it’s all over the place. The
breath will be coming in and out, in and out, your mind will be catching it
and then wandering away. Try to come back again. Your awareness is not
going to be able to follow it, but eventually, you will start following it a little
bit. You come back again, lose it. And then, oh, you’ve latched on. You’ve
come into the breath a little bit. Your awareness is starting to become internalized with the breath. You’re getting closer and closer to it. You’re coming
inside the body. You are starting to experience the inside nature of the body.
So different breath, different physical sensations. Short breath – hard
punchiness, long breath – smooth and gliding. You can make a note of this
phenomena.  You  can  start  to  understand  that  the  time  to  breath  in,  short
breath or long breath, will cause different physical sensations. You can start
to  see  that  there  is  some  cause  and  effect  happening  here  in  the  present
moment. You can start to see that the breath is conditioning the body. There
is  some  conditioning  going  on.  It  is  not  so  important  to  pay  attention  to
this now, but if it starts to become clear to you, make a note of that. There
is cause and effect happening between the body and the breath. Cause and
effect  happening  between  the  breath  and  the  mind  as  well.  All  three  are
linked  together.  Physical  sensations,  breath  and  mind.  They’re  all  adjusting. One is the cause, one is effect. Changing and swapping positions who
is causing, and who is affecting who. The mind and body process continues
to go on day and night. The breath continues to flow in and out regardless of
what you think, regardless of who you are. The four elements are the same.
Your four elements are the same as my four elements. The same as the four
<span class="pdfpage">33</span>  elements  outside.  The  internal  elements  are  the  same  as  the  external  four
elements. This body is just a physical manifestation of your mind state. We
will talk about that later as well.</p>
<p>So  become  aware  of  just  following  the  breath.  I  want  you  to  try  to
follow  the  breath  as  closely  as  you  can.  From  beginning  until  end.  From
beginning until end. We follow them from the nose tip, paying attention to
the touching sensation. We follow it down to the abdomen. I want you all
to follow and chase the breath in and out. If you find that one place is more
comfortable than another to watch, especially I want you to be aware of the
rising and falling of the abdomen, if you want to watch the breath just there
or if you want to watch the breath just at the nose, you can do that for a little
bit. See which one feels more comfortable. But try to follow it in and out the
whole way and keep your attention and awareness continuously in the present moment. And then the characteristics of those four elements will start to
become clearer and clearer. They will only become clear if you have been
able to watch the breath, let’s say for five or 10 minutes. We start to be able
to continuously watch the breath over and over again without missing and
these physical sensations come to life. They start to display themselves quite
clearly and then you’ll break through. Instead of seeing a car or car parts,
you  will    break  through  and  you  will  see  metal,  plastic,  glass  and  rubber.
You will see the actual reality behind the concept of car, behind the concept
of breathing, behind the concept of body. You will see actually what is there.
And it will surprise you. It will shock you. It will amaze you, that the mind
can actually know the body in such away.</p>
<p>In fact, it has been able to do it for a long time already. We just haven’t
trained  the  mind  to  do  that  in  our  societies.  We  don’t  train  the  mind  in
this  way.  We  are  not  taught  to  observe  to  look  inside  the  body.  Most  of
our  knowledge  in  our  sciences  comes  from  observing  things  through  the
eyeball. Whether it’s the external world or whether it’s the body itself. We
look through microscopes. Our knowledge arises through the eye door. We
see things and then we think about it, and then we develop some theories
and it becomes knowledge. It becomes truth. But all this information only
comes  into  through  the  eye-door.  We  will  be  experiencing  the  body  in  a
very different way that physiologists don’t experience, that anatomists, the
<span class="pdfpage">34</span>  doctors  don’t  experience.  Doctors  have  been  trained  to  examine  the  body
through their eye-door. They have a vast knowledge of the body, that they
have  managed  to  accumulate  through  the  eye-door. The  eye-door  leads  to
certain kinds of knowledge and types of information but it doesn’t lead to
wisdom in that way. Of course, wisdom arises when we notice and know and
let go at the eye-door. But that is not what the scientists have done. So we are
going to observe the body in a radically different way than scientists observe
the body. We’re not interested in looking at protons, neutrons and electrons.
We’re  not  interested  in  looking  at  bone  marrow.  We  are  not  interested  in
looking at amino acids. All these things have been investigated for a long
time and nobody got enlightened from doing so. That’s because they’ve been
observing through the eye-door. We’re going to be using the mind door to
investigate the body. The first stage is to become aware of the whole body as
it is sitting in its posture.</p>
<p>So  when  we  come  into  the  room,  we  establish  our  awareness  in  the
present and then we climb inside. So we are deep inside the body and we are
watching the breath as it flows in and flows out. Gliding in and gliding out.
We are doing that over and over again. This will give us some knowledge
about the nature of the mind and body process.</p>
<p>So we have been talking about sitting meditation. This will be enough
for us to get started tomorrow morning when we hit the mat at 4:30.</p>
</section>
<section id="walking-meditation">
<h2><span class="section-number">2.7. </span>Walking meditation</h2>
<p>I also want to talk about our walking meditation. In fact, let’s all stand
up and as you are standing up there, just bring your awareness into the present moment and become aware of the whole body as it is standing there on
the  mat.  See  if  you  can  just  become  aware  of  the  physical  sensations  on
standing. Close your eyes. How do you know that you have a body? Don’t
think about it, experience it. Experience the body with the body. Know the
body. Put your mind into your left foot. Now put your mind into your right
foot. See if you can swap your mind from the left foot to the right foot. How
does it feel like? Is there a different physical sensation when the mind is in
the foot as when the mind is not in the foot? Can you experience your mind,
your awareness, your consciousness jumping from one foot to the other? Do
<span class="pdfpage">35</span>  you feel the physical sensations of softness when you are standing on a mat?
There are two objects very present. There is the standing posture, that’s one
object. And then there is the touching sensation of your feet on the mat. This
is  standing.  Standing  and  touching.  Left  foot  touching,  standing  posture,
right foot touching, standing posture.</p>
<p>You can move back and forth. If you need to stand up during the meditation  practice,  you  can  stand  up  and  become  aware  of  the  hole  standing
posture. You can become aware of the touching sensation of the feet on the
mat. You can move your consciousness from your nose, down to your abdomen. Move your mind around inside your body.</p>
<p>We  always  start  our  walking  meditation  with  the  standing  posture.
That’s how we start. We become aware, bring our mind into the present, we
climb inside the body. We become aware of the whole thing that’s standing
there. There is something standing there. It’s breathing. It’s got holes in the
side of its head, it hears stuff. It’s got eyes in the front of its head, it sees
stuff. Smelling and tasting go on as well. There’s something there. It thinks
about itself a lot. In fact, that’s all it thinks about. Its favorite subject, me.
It’s been all its day and all its night thinking about its past and future. It’s
completely and totally obsessed with itself. But now it’s just standing. Just
standing. – Okay, you can sit down now.</p>
<p>During the retreat we are going to alternate between walking and sitting meditation. We do 45 minutes of walking meditation and do 45 minutes
of sitting meditation. As I said before, try to join these two sessions together.
Try to make them into an hour and a half. One continuous session if possible.
When the formal walking meditation takes place, we try to find a place
where we can walk from one place to another. We’re walking from A to B,
15 paces long. 10, 15, 20 as space permits. We’re walking from one place
to another place, turning around, and walking back again. We are all going
to choose a place where we are going to do this for the week. Some of you
like to walk in the meditation hall here. That’s possible. There is also places
to  walk  around  the  Buddha  hall. You  can  walk  around  the  outside  of  the
Buddha hall or you can walk inside the Buddha hall. You can also walk on
these sandy areas. You can also use the yoga hall for your walking meditation practice. Find a place where you won’t be disturbed. Many people tell
<span class="pdfpage">36</span>  me  that  they  get  disturbed  by  other  people  walking  around  them.  Find  a
place  where  you  can  lower  your  eyes  and  pay  attention  to  your  walking
meditation. It should be between 10 and 20 steps long. More than this will
make your mind wander. Try to keep it to a back-and-forth process. Walking
around a circle sometimes just leads the mind wandering and then you end
up with a body just walking around and a mind a million miles away.</p>
<p>Just like in the sitting meditation, where the breath is used as concept
for  maintaining  our  awareness  in  the  present  moment,  we  are  going  to  be
using the steps of the body to lead us to the physical sensations in the body.
What I mean by that is, in the sitting meditation, we are using the breath as
a concept, in, out, in, out. If we can do that continuously, we start to become
aware of the physical sensations in the body. We are using a concept to get
back to real objects, the physical body sensations.</p>
<p>We  are  going  to  use  the  walking  meditation  to  do  exactly  the  same
thing. In the beginning stages, you can just use two steps. ‘Lifting, placing,
lifting, placing’. This is a concept. The foot lifts up and the foot gets placed
down. We are walking back and forth. We’re becoming aware of the beginning of the step and the end of the step. Beginning of the step and the end of
the step. If we can put our mind into our feet and can follow along with this,
the physical sensations in the body will start to become clearer to us.</p>
<p>You can start by doing the two stage walking meditation or we can start
by doing the three stage walking meditation. Up to you! We will explain all
of them in a few moments. We can also do the one stage walking meditation.
Most of the time we will do, what we call the four stage walking meditation
practice. ‘Lifting, raising, moving, placing’.</p>
<p>The physical sensations that are produced in the feet, are our object in
this meditation practice. This is the most important thing that we’re paying
attention to. We’re keeping our mind in the present moment. We’re keeping
our mind internally. We are using a conceptual framework to maintain our
awareness  in  the  present  moment  and  we  are  noting  and  knowing  exactly
what is going on. At this stage of practice, just the physical sensations produced by walking. They’re all there. All four elements will be manifesting
themselves in the feet.</p>
<p>First you become aware of the standing posture. You stand completely
<span class="pdfpage">37</span>  still and bring yourself into the present moment and become aware that the
whole body is standing and that the feet are touching the floor. In the walking meditation we don’t need to pay attention to the breath. We are paying
attention to the present moment physical sensations that are occurring in the
feet while we’re moving the feet.</p>
<p>‘Lifting, raising, moving, placing’. You can use these words if they’re
helpful  to  you. The  most  important  thing  about  the  walking  meditation  is
keeping your mind in your feet. Just like in the sitting practice, we are keeping the mind following the breath. In the walking practice, we must keep our
mind inside our feet. Specifically, try to keep your awareness on the sole of
your foot that is moving. We want to keep our mind in the moving foot at
all times. We’re not just walking around with our minds traveling here and
there. We are keeping our mind just in the part of the foot that is moving.</p>
<p>I want you to pay particular attention to the beginning and end of each
of these movements. You start to lift and it’s finished. Moving – it’s finished.
Placing – finished. Each of these stages comes to an end. It starts and it finishes. There’s a present moment event taking place. It starts and it finishes.
And  then  the  new  event  takes  place.  It  starts  and  finishes. The  moment  is
arising and passing away. Nothing else continues on from that moment. It’s
finished. It’s finished. Things are passing away continuously. So pay attention to this, keep your mind in your feet during the walking meditation.</p>
<p>Where  do  we  keep  our  eyes?  Our  eyes  in  our  walking  meditation
should be lowered. We want to keep our eyes looking at about two meters
in front of us. We have our eyes closed a little bit. We don’t want to be in
complete darkness – you can try that as well, it’s very effective. But we don’t
want to have our eyes open so that we can look at other people. We are not
going to spend our time looking at other peoples’ bodies. We are not going to
walk around looking at the trees or looking at insects or creatures that we’ve
never seen before. There is lots of things to look at. But looking doesn’t lead
to meditation practice. We want to keep our awareness inside the body as
much as we possibly can. We’re not allowing the mind to run out through
our eyes. We are keeping all our energy packaged within the body. We are
not looking at anybody. If you hear some sound, don’t go following and try
to chase it. Don’t go out trying to identify what that sound is. Is that a car or
<span class="pdfpage">38</span>  a motor bike? We are not interested in what the sound is. We just note that
some hearing occurred and it’s gone. That’s it. You hear a dog bark and then
all the stuff you paint on top of that can be minutes’ worth of nonsense. Just
from one noise, one sound – hearing occurring. Hearing is very natural. You
have holes in your head. There is sounds outside. Hearing occurs. It doesn’t
belong to anyone. There’s nobody there that’s hearing. It’s a natural process.
Seeing  is  the  same.  There’s  nobody  who  sees  anything.  But  the  sensitive
matter  in  your  eyeballs  can  detect  light  and  forms,  they  are  out  there,  it’s
functioning, they’re coming together, seeing is occurring. There’s no person
there that needs to be a seer. It’s all natural. An impersonal process. Hearing
takes  place.  Seeing  takes  place.  So  in  our  walking  meditation  this  can  be
very distracting.</p>
<p>So  we  try  to  keep  our  heads  lowered,  keep  our  eyes  focused  on  the
ground, we are not looking at other people, we hear some sounds, we just
disregard it – okay, hearing occurred, finished, no longer interested in.</p>
<p>A good position for our hands in the walking meditation is just in front.
Some people like to keep their hands behind. That’s fine as well. You can
keep your hands still at the side. So we want to be as still as possible except
for  the  moving  parts  that  we’re  paying  attention  to.  The  lifting,  moving,
placing. So the most important thing is to keep your mind inside your feet
while you’re doing it.</p>
<p>Some  people  become  frustrated  with  the  walking  meditation.  They
think it’s not working. When I ask them where their mind is, they say, «what
do you mean?» You can’t follow the breath unless your mind is following
the breath. You can’t do the walking meditation unless your mind is in your
feet. This is where we see the sensations taking place. There is all kinds of
sensations happening in the foot. As we lift the foot up, there is one type of
sensation. We push the foot forward, there’s another type of sensation. As we
place the foot down, there’s another type of sensation. In fact, there is five or
six different sensations in each one. Lightness, vibration, softness, pushing,
hardness – all there. You can feel them as you do the practice and it will start
to unfold.</p>
<p>To  give  you  a  demonstration: We  stand,  we  start,  bringing  ourselves
into  the  present  moment,  bringing  ourselves  internal,  establish  our  awareness <span class="pdfpage">39</span>   in  the  feet,  left  side,  right  side,  left  side,  right  side,  lower  the  head,
open the eyes a little bit so that the light comes in, make a note ‘seeing’ is
occurring, and then when you lift your heel have your mind really right in
your foot, ‘lifting’, stops, ‘moving’, stops, ‘placing’, stops.
<em>It’s really, really important  that  you  have  gaps  between  these  three  stages.</em>
There  needs  to
be a definite stop. There needs to be a lifting. Stop. ‘Moving’. Stop. ‘Placing’. Stop. ‘Standing, standing’. Bring yourself into the full body again. And
then when you turn around, ‘lifting, turning, placing’. You’re coming into
still  again.  Standing  is  taking  place.  ‘Standing,  standing’. And  off  you  go
again. 10 steps or 15 steps, back-and-forth, keeping your mind in the present
moment, keeping your mind inside the body.</p>
<p>Looking  out  for  physical  sensations  as  they  are  arising  and  passing
away. The most important thing, keep your mind in the present, keep your
mind internal, keep your mind in your feet, when you are doing the walking
meditation practice. Make sure there are gaps between the three stages of the
walking practice. You need to be able to see the arising and passing. Arising
and passing. Arising and passing. Doing a step as you normally walk, there
is no breakup. There is no arising and passing away. The sensations will be
shifting  and  changing  too  rapidly  for  your  mind  to  be  able  to  catch  up  to
them. So we need to slow down with the walking meditation. We are walking relatively slowly. In particular, the last 20 or 30 minutes of the walking
meditation should be much slower than the first 10 or 15 minutes. The first
10 or 15 minutes you establish some rhythm. You should try to be continuous in the rhythm like a watch. ‘Lifting, moving, placing, lifting, moving,
placing, lifting, moving, placing, lifting, moving, placing, lifting, moving,
placing’. So the mind gets a bit into a rhythm and starts to become aware
and contained in itself.</p>
<p>In  the  beginning  stages  you  will  find  it  quite  boring.  You  won’t  be
making much sense of it. But once it starts to work, it really works well. For
many newcomers to meditation, walking meditation gives them the results
before the sitting meditation. So don’t think that the walking meditation is
somehow secondary. Many people had some wonderful, deep and profound
insights, life changing insights on the walking path in this monastery. Just
by walking and paying attention you can learn a lot about the mind and the
<span class="pdfpage">40</span>  body process. You can learn a lot about cause and effect.</p>
<p>Try to perform the turning around efficiently. When you hear the bell
at the end of the walking meditation practice, walk slowly to the meditation
hall. It should be a slow and gradual transition from the walking path into
your seat. There shouldn’t be any gaps of unmindfulness to occur. We want
to be continuous with our awareness.</p>
<p>You  start  to  see  things  that  you  normally  don’t  see. You  start  to  see
weird sensations in the feet. If you are new to walking meditation, I suggest
that you walk on a hard surface for the first few days. Walk inside the hall
here. Walking on the sand may be a little bit tricky for the first stages of the
walking meditation. We also do walking meditation, when we move around
the  monastery.  When  you  are  moving  from  this  hall  to  the  dining  hall  or
when you are moving from the dining hall to your dorm. Try to be aware
of the walking posture as well. There’s a whole thing that’s walking. Try to
keep your awareness internalized. You can pay attention to the touching of
your feet on the floor if you like. No shoes will be helpful for this. This is
something I should mention. During the walking meditation we should not
use shoes, no flip-flops, no rubber sandals or anything else. We use just our
bare feet.</p>
<p>So we need to activate our awareness in the present moment, bring our
awareness inside the body and start paying attention to the physical sensations that are occurring, using the concepts of the in- and out-breath, using
the concepts of lifting, moving, placing, we can bring our mind into an experience of nature. Into an experience of reality.</p>
<p>I want you all to pay very much attention making your walking meditation smooth and continuous. Just like the clock. Tic-tic-tic-tic-tic-tic. This
happens very smooth and continuously. So should our walking meditation
be.  Lifting,  moving,  placing,  lifting,  moving,  placing.  Try  to  get  yourself
into a rhythm.</p>
<p>Of  course,  there  is  going  to  be  thoughts  coming  up.  There  are  two
types of thoughts. Two ways that we can deal with thoughts that happen on
the walking meditation path. Some thoughts are just going to be little ones,
that just kind of bubble up and don’t lead anywhere. You just have a thought
about  something  and  then  it’s  gone  again.  When  those  kind  of  thoughts
<span class="pdfpage">41</span>  happen, you can just note it. Thinking is occurring. And then continue with
your walking practice. If you find that thoughts come up and turn into a bit of
a story, if you find that you are just walking around, lifting, moving, placing,
but your mind is thinking about other things then you need to stop. You need
to stop and stand still and become quiet for a moment. And then start again.
During the first few days this may happen very often.</p>
<p>For  a  warm  up  you  can  just  stand  on  one  foot.  Just  lift  one  foot  up,
keep your awareness in the front of the foot, in the middle of the foot, and
than  just  drag  it  back  keeping  your  mind  inside  your  foot. And  then  push
it forward. And pull and push. Keeping your mind inside. Can you feel the
physical sensations on the bottom of the foot? On the sole of the foot? There
is some vibrations going on there. Keep your mind in your foot while you’re
pushing it forward. It is really a push. We say moving, but it’s really pushing
the foot through. Feel the friction and the resistance that’s there if you push
and pull your foot backwards and forwards. Like you’re pushing it through
water.</p>
<p>Sometimes our walking meditation feels like we are on cross country
skis  or  we  are  ice  skating. We  are  really  pushing  the  foot  and  pulling  the
foot. Try to catch that physical sensation there on the bottom of the foot. It’s
the physical sensation which is the object of our meditation. That is what we
follow. That physical vibration on the bottom of the foot.</p>
<p>It may take some time to get used to it. You’re certainly used to walking. But you’re not used to putting your mind in your feet. The mind normally goes out to enjoy the sensual pleasures. Something delightful through
the  eye,  ear,  nose,  tongue  or  body  door.  Something  to  think  about.  We’re
keeping the mind inside the body and we’re paying attention to the physical
sensations. If you like, before you start the walking meditation practice, just
warm your feet in this way up for your walking meditation. Push, pull, push,
pull. About 10 times on each foot. Just kind of warm-up your awareness for
that  physical  sensation. And  then  once  you  have  warmed  it  up,  try  doing
your walking practice and you will find, that you will be able to follow along
a lot easier.</p>
<p>There’s a few other things. No shoes when we do the walking meditation. We don’t need to lift up the feet high either and we are not walking one
<span class="pdfpage">42</span>  foot in front of each other either. We’re not on a catwalk in kind of some
balancing act. Just the normal way that you walk, the normal height that you
walk. In fact, if you keep your feet lower to the floor, you will have a better
balance.</p>
<p>This is how we practice the walking meditation. The walking meditation  instructions  will  be  updated  almost  daily  and  we  will  go  further  and
further and so will be the sitting meditation practice.</p>
</section>
</section>


            <div class="clearer"></div>
          </div>
      </div>
      <div class="clearer"></div>
    </div>
  </body>
</html>