<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
  <head>
    <meta charset="utf-8" />
    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0" /><meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1" />

    <title>3. Day 1, morning</title>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="_static/pygments.css" />
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="_static/epub.css" />
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="_static/custom.css" /> 
  </head><body>

    <div class="document">
      <div class="documentwrapper">
          <div class="body" role="main">
            
  <section id="day-1-morning">
<h1><span class="section-number">3. </span>Day 1, morning</h1>
<iframe width="100%" height="120" src="https://www.mixcloud.com/widget/iframe/?feed=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.mixcloud.com%2Fanthonymarkwell%2F03-8_12_-day-1-a_-morning%2F&amp;hide_cover=1" frameborder="0"></iframe>
<section id="general-outline">
<h2><span class="section-number">3.1. </span>General outline</h2>
<p>This  morning  we’re  going  to  talk  about  Vipassana  and  give  you  a
general  outline  about  what  we’re  doing  here  this  week. We’ve  introduced
the practice last night giving you first initial mediation instructions, putting
the mind into the present moment, internalizing your awareness and paying
attention to the breath as it comes in and out of the body. In particular, we
are paying attention to the physical sensations produced by the breath as the
breath flows in and out of the body</p>
<p>This morning we’re going to look at Vipassana. We said last night «vi»
is an intensifying prefix, «passana» means to see. So to see clearly. To see
things as they really are, that’s what Vipassana means.</p>
<p>The ground of Vipassana is satipatthana practice. Vipassana starts to
arise when we practice satipatthana or activating our awareness on the four
foundations of mindfulness. Those four foundations are the physical sensations in the body, feelings – either pleasant or unpleasant – emotional states
and the fourth one is reaction or thoughts or identification if you like.</p>
<p>All Vipassana systems take these four foundations of mindfulness as
their base. Sometimes the techniques can be slightly different but they’re all
establishing awareness in the present moment using our own mind and body
<span class="pdfpage">44</span>  process as the objects of our observation. So the purpose of Vipassana is to
see things as they really are, to see the mind and body process in the present
moment as impermanent, unsatisfactory and non-self.</p>
<p>The duty of this practice is to destroy defilements at the six sense doors.
Once your awareness and wisdom can be activated continuously in the present moment, we move from just observing the body door or selected objects
and we start to broaden our awareness out to the six sense doors. The eye
door, the ear door, the nose door, the tongue door, the body door, that we’re
working with at the moment, and the mind door. These six sense doors. We’ll
be able to note, know and let go at these six sense doors.</p>
<p>The purpose is to first of all start to wiggle free of this sense of self that
we’ve developed over a period of time moment after moment, after moment
of being unaware of what’s actually going on in the present moment, allowing  craving  for  being  to  enter  into  the  present  moment,  allowing  craving
to infiltrate the field of awareness. What happens is that craving for being
subjectifies  that  moment.  It  becomes  a  moment  where  things  are  taken  as
me, mine and I. It becomes a moment where duality is created. There’s a me
and there is the external world and all other people going on around it. And
this happens very naturally and continuously. It happens without us thinking
about it. It’s been going on since we were borne. It’s happening to everyone
unless, of course, they’ve done the practice, seen it happening for them in
real time and they’ve been able to follow the advice, the strategy given by
the Buddha in uprooting this sense of self, removing this sense of self. We’ll
be going into this subjectivity and how it arises as the retreat goes on. But
just know that the practice or the duty of the practice is to destroy defilement, destroy the liking and disliking, destroy the attachment and aversion
that is arising at the six sense bases continuously. The ultimate result of our
Vipassana practice is the full removal of dukkha, the full understanding of
dukkha, which allows us to understand the nature of craving and see the cessation of craving and that the path is fulfilled.</p>
<p>So  we’re  going  to  be  using  some  various  tools  on  this  journey  for
understanding the sense of self and removing the sense of self. First of all
we’ll be collecting some information on this
<em>sutta-maya pañña</em>, the type of
knowledge which arises from information. Somebody gives you some information <span class="pdfpage">45</span>  and you’ll know something about it, something about the object or
something about the subject. Secondly, we use also a bit of thinking, this is
<em>citta-maya pañña</em>, the type of wisdom that arises through thinking. Not the
full understanding of an object – there are various levels of understanding of
things. The third type of wisdom that arises is the wisdom that arises from
pañña, from bhavana,
<em>bhavana-maya pañña</em>. This is the wisdom that arises
intuitively. We’re going to use all three of these types of wisdom. They all
have different levels.</p>
<p>If I was going to tell you about my parents’ house, what it looks like,
then  you’ll  have  some  information. You’ll  understand  to  a  certain  degree
of  what  type  of  house  they  live  in.  It  won’t  be  very  clear  but  you’ll  have
some  understanding. That’s  the  first  layer,  the  first  level  of  understanding
something. Secondly, we normally think about things. If I tell you about my
parents’ house and then you start to think about it. You start to analyze it.
You may come to a bit more of a clearer picture what this thing is, what this
house is my parents are living in. Still, you wouldn’t fully imagine exactly
how  it  looks  like. You  don’t  know  exactly  how  my  parents’  house  is  like.
You have never been there. You have never really examined it. You can look
at it on the map and get all kinds of information. Various people can tell you
about what my parents’ house looks like. You can even have some photos of
how my parents’ house looks like. There are many different ways of collecting information and trying to discover what it is. But until you have actually
been to my parents’ house, you don’t actually know what it truly is.</p>
<p>And it’s the same with the meditation practice. We don’t fully understand the nature of the mind and the body process simply by reading about
it, reading about meditation. We won’t understand the mind and body process  through  thinking  about  it.  Thinking  is  actually  an  object  of  wisdom.
Thinking about something doesn’t lead us to wisdom. Thinking is an object
of wisdom. Finally we get through all the information and all the thinking,
we  can  put  that  all  aside  and  we  can  experience  our  own  mind  and  body
process through our own meditation practice. That’s when we come to a true
understanding about the nature of the mind and body process – this mind and
body process, that’s going on here. We are not so interested in other people’s
mind  and  body  processes.  We’re  interested  in  investigating  this  one  here.
We’re interested in investigating what we know as
<em>nama-rupa</em>.
<em>Nama</em>
<span class="pdfpage">46</span>   means
the mind,
<em>rupa</em>
means the matter. Mind and matter. It’s a mind and matter
process that we’ve painted in our perception, in our thinking, so we get a
conceptual idea about what it actually is. However, our concepts don’t truly
cover the nature of our mind and body process. So this week, we’re going to
be investigating this mind and body process. Essentially the mind and body
process are in a vortex, dependent upon each other. When the mind arises,
the body also arises. When the body arises, the mind also arises. So these
things are locked together in a vortex dependently conditioning each other.
We’re going to be looking into this.</p>
<p>Last night we talked about the nature of the body, the four elements.
The  elements  of  extension,  temperature,  movement  and  cohesion.  These
four elements joining together making this physical body. And then there is a
mind as well. There is a mind which has feelings, it has various perceptions,
various thoughts about it – primarily those three things are joined together
in the mind. And then there is consciousness.</p>
<p>Consciousness  is  that  which  knows  the  mind  and  body  process. The
mind  and  body  process  are  spinning,  are  dependent  on  each  other.  Consciousness is like a vessel that allows these things to arise and pass away.
Consciousness is also arising and passing away. In fact, the body, the mind
and consciousness – the five aggregates are arising and passing away every
single moment. Moment after moment. They’re arising and passing away at
the six sense bases. At these six doors the five aggregates are manifesting.
There will be a physical component to our experience, there will be a feeling component to our experience, there will be perceptions and recognitions
about what is going on, there will be some thought, liking and disliking and
subjectification about the experience that’s going on in the present moment.
Our experience which is the experience of consciousness is just simply mind
and  matter.  It  doesn’t  belong  to  anybody.  It  doesn’t  have  an  owner.  It’s  a
mental and physical phenomena arising and passing away according to their
conditioning, arising and passing away according to the law of dependent
arising. And we’ll be talking more on this as the week goes on.</p>
<p>Essentially  what  we’re  doing  in  our  Vipassana  meditation  practice
is  observing  this  mind  and  body  process.  Consciousness  which  is  just  the
<span class="pdfpage">47</span>  knowing,  it’s  just  knowing,  it  knows  things.  That’s  its  only  function.  It’s
not yours, it’s not you! You’re not the consciousness and the consciousness
does not belong to you. It’s function is to know things. When presented with
something,  it  knows  it.  Depending  on  what  factors  are  surrounding  consciousness it’ll know in a particular way. If our consciousness is surrounded
by  helpful  mental  factors,  then  we’ll  start  to  see  things  as  they  really  are.
When consciousness is surrounded by hindrances, mental states that cloud
the mind and don’t allow us to see things clearly, then that will be our experience. So our meditation practice is to develop certain mental factors, so that
we can surround the knowing with able bodied workers so that they can note
and know exactly what is going on in the present moment.</p>
<p>So we’ll start to dissect our sense experience. First we’ll do it by me
talking to you and then we’ll start to realize for ourselves in our practice.
We’ll go through a few different exercises.</p>
<p>I’ve  said  last  night  that  the  present  moment  is  defined  as  mind  and
matter  which  is  arising  independent  of  desire.  This  is  what  nama-rupa  is.
Nama-rupa arising independent of desire. Mind and matter, when it arises
in its natural state, when it is not infected by craving, when it is not infected
by  craving  for  being,  when  it’s  not  under  the  illusion  of  a  self  trying  to
become  something,  it’s  not  trying  to  be  anything,  it’s  not  interested  in  a
self or becoming an ego or developing more sense of I, when the mind and
body process drops this behavior, we start to experience some freedom. We
start to experience the results of Vipassana practice. We start to experience
the world which is beyond defilement, beyond craving arising in the present  moment.  We’ll  be  able  to  see  this  for  ourselves.  This  is  a  well  tested
meditation technique that’s been practiced for a very long time, many, many
centuries. In fact for 26 centuries people have been practicing this meditation technique realizing the benefits of this meditation technique. I hope you
all have a good opportunity to really practice this week and to realize the
benefits of this practice.</p>
<p>As  we’re  practicing  in  this  way,  not  only  do  we  want  to  understand
what is the content of our mind, not only do we want to understand the physical sensations in the body. That’s the
<em>individual characteristics</em>
of things. We
know when the mind is happy, we know when the mind is feeling greedy or
<span class="pdfpage">48</span>  when it’s feeling some aversion. We know when the mind is starting to calm
down and become still. We know when the mind is becoming agitated. These
are the individual characteristics that arise and pass away. This is mental and
physical  phenomena  arising  and  passing  away  in  the  present  moment.  It’s
one thing to understand these. It’s one thing to understand all the different
content but we don’t want to get stuck in content. Our Vipassana practice
goes far beyond the contents of our body and mind process.</p>
<p>What we’re looking at is the structure and the nature of the mind and
body process. There are many thoughts that will arise and pass away. There
will be many different subjects, they’ll be arising and passing away on the
past, arising and passing into the future. Arising and passing away thinking,
imagining, reflecting – all kinds of mental activities will be going on. These
are  all  independent  events  but  they  are  all  joined  together.  They  all  have
one common characteristic, or should we say they have three common characteristics. When we look at them from a structural point of view, they are
all impermanent. It doesn’t matter what the content is, it arises and passes
away.  All  the  content,  all  the  mind  and  body  processes  are  also  dukkha.
We’ll be using this word this week, dukkha, normally translated as suffering
or unsatisfactoriness. It’s a word the Buddha used to describe the unsatisfactory nature of the mind and body process when it’s under the illusion of a
self. When the mind and body process has chosen to believe it is somebody,
when the mind and body process has become subjectified. And this is called
dukkha. The Buddha’s term for it was
<em>pancha uppadhana kandha vidukkha</em>.
The five aggregates affected by clinging or attachment is dukkha.</p>
<p>So we’ll be investigating this and seeing that these mind states, as different as they may be, all share
<em>three common characteristics: they’re impermanent,  they’re  relatively  unsatisfactory  and  they’re  also  non-self</em>.  These
mind processes that arise and pass away, the physical body that arises and
passes away, don’t belong to anybody. It’s all happening by itself. In fact,
there is an intricate law of nature that combines things together, that combines  the  mind  and  body  together,  causes  and  effects  together,  to  produce
this result, this ongoing flow, this ongoing manifestation of mind and body
process in the present moment. It’s completely out of control.</p>
<p>So, impermanence, dukkha and non-self of all conditioned phenomena
<span class="pdfpage">49</span>  is what we want to get to in our Vipassana practice. At the moment we’ll
start to watch the body, come to terms with that, then we’ll start to have a
look at the mind, come to terms with that. We’ll start to see that sometimes
the  body  is  the  cause,  sometimes  it’s  an  effect.  Sometimes  the  mind  is  a
cause, sometimes the mind is an effect. All these things, causes and effect,
mind and body, all are subject to the same three characteristics. They are all
impermanent, they’re all subject to change, they’re unstable, they’re arising
and  passing  away.  They’re  being  used  as  an  object  in  which  craving  can
enter upon and develop a sense of me. They are the matrix, these mental and
physical phenomena. They are not you! They arise and pass away so rapidly
that you can’t possibly identify as being you once you’ve seen them. You’ll
know  that  that’s  not  you.  That’s  not  me.  I’m  not  that. And  definitely  not
that. You’ll start to see that there is nobody there. Nobody in the mind and
body process! There’s no experiencer! There’s lots of experiencing. Hearing
is occurring but there is no hearer. Seeing is occurring but there is no seer.
Thoughts  arise  and  pass  away  but  there  is  nobody  who  is  thinking  them.
There is no thinker there. It’s all a dependently arisen, conditioned matrix,
that’s arising and passing away. Unfortunately, it has been affected by craving to be. This very strong desire to become has infected the mind and body
process. Each experience is taken as an experience for me, it’s taken as being
mine. This is happening to me. This is where I was born, these are my parents.  The  whole  world  is  subjectified  with  me  at  the  center.  It’s  me,  and
everything else is going around. We’ve created a duality.</p>
<p>Luckily for us, there is a way out of this. We need to be able to see the
structure of our sense experience. We need to understand that it’s all impermanent. We need to see that this is an unsatisfactory state of affairs. This is
an unsatisfactory place, we got ourselves in. When we see the arising and
passing away of mental and physical phenomena, you’ll come to understand
that this is indeed quite an unsatisfactory situation. You’ll come to understand why the Buddha called this dukkha. You’ll understand that this mind
and body process has been arising and passing away for a very, very, very
long time. And it will continue to do so, unless something is done about it.
Unless it can be broken through and seen as it really is. And that’s the purpose of our Vipassana practice. To break through and see that this mind and
<span class="pdfpage">50</span>  body process doesn’t actually belong to anyone. It’s fueled by its old karmic
intentions. Old karmic intentions producing their resultants. That’s what this
mind and body is. Effectively resultants coming from old karma manifesting
in the present moment believing that they are somebody. And then, a new
karmic resultant has the opportunity to arise and pass away. And then a new
one. And then a new one arises and passes away. It’s incessant! It’s continuous! There are very little gaps.
<em>Impermanence is hidden from us by what is known as santati or continuity.</em>
We can’t see the gaps, just like when we’re
watching a film, we don’t see the individual frames of the film. We see the
movie. Actually that movie is made of each discrete individual events and so
is our life made up of exactly this at the six sense doors arising and passing
away so rapidly that we actually never see the frames. We only see the movie
and the movie is my life. The movie is about me.</p>
<p>You’ll  notice  this  week  that  you  spend  a  lot  of  time  thinking  about
yourself. This is not because of the retreat. This is how it normally is. We’re
just noticing it for the first time perhaps. You’ll see that this thing continuously,  incessantly  thinks  about  itself.  It’s  completely  obsessed  with  itself.
It can’t think of anything else to think about. It loves to think about itself.
Reminisces about the past or the traumas of the past or the worries of the
past. Or it’s interested in what its plans are going to be, how it’s going to
become,  what  it’s  going  to  manifest  as.  It  loves  to  think  about  that  stuff.
Diligently planning every detail of where it’s going to be and what it’s going
to  become.  If  it’s  not  doing  those  things  then  it’s  engaging  and  indulging
in enjoyment and delight in sensual pleasures finding little things for it to
enjoy. It finds little nice things to look at, pleasant things to listen to, nice
things  to  smell  and  taste.  When  those  things  don’t  interest  it  anymore,  it
goes and finds some new things. This is what this mind and body is doing.
Constantly  reacting  to  pleasant  feeling  and  unpleasant  feeling.
<em>Dukkha  is</em>
<em>hidden from us by the body posture.</em>
By simply not paying attention to the
body, not paying attention to the posture, we don’t see the nature of dukkha.
Dukkha is arising in this mind and body process continuously. Just try holding your body still for an hour. Any posture, it doesn’t matter, sitting, standing, walking or lying down. Try to do all, try to do one for an hour and see
what  happens  to  the  body.  See  if  you  can  feel  any  unpleasant  sensations
<span class="pdfpage">51</span>  arising in the body. It’s continuously arising. This thing is a manifestation
of unpleasant physical sensations. That’s why we have to keep moving it.
That’s  why  we  have  to  constantly  transition  between  these  four  different
postures.  Walking,  standing,  sitting  and  lying  down.  Because  the  dukkha,
the painfulness, just keeps coming. Hold it like this for while. It becomes
too much, you have to move your leg. You sit down, you have to stand up.
Even when you’ve been lying down, even that becomes uncomfortable. You
have to sit up, you have to stand up, you have to walk a little bit. If you have
been walking, you have to sit down again. Constantly transitioning between
these four postures. This is what hides the nature of dukkha from us. By not
paying  attention  to  our  posture. When  we  don’t  see  the  posture,  when  we
don’t internalize our awareness in the present moment, we don’t see what’s
happening. We just think we’re moving our shoulders, just make ourselves a
little more comfortable, lean a little bit, do this, lean that way, find a wall to
lean on and slumping our shoulders. Finding any kind of comfortable position, see how long you can keep it and then, dukkha manifesting. You have
to move again! Constantly moving.</p>
<p><em>The third characteristic of non-self is hidden by compactness or ghana-</em>
<em>saññā, perception of compactness.</em>
It appears like this mind and body process
is all joined together. It’s all pacted. We can’t see beyond it. Just like the car
down their in the car park. We don’t see beyond «car». It’s compacted. We
just see one thing. «Car». That’s it. We don’t bother to investigate. It is actually different car parts. Actually, it’s only rubber, glass, metal and plastic. We
don’t investigate that. We don’t see that. We don’t see the conceptual objects
and don’t see it in our own mind and body process. The fact that things are
separated is hidden from us because of this swiftly, constantly flowing river.
There is no gaps in it. Compacted together.</p>
<p>So these three characteristics of our structural experience is what Vipassana  practice  is  all  about. You’ll  intuitively  know  impermanence,  dukkha
and non-self. You’ll know them as dependent arisen and conditioned. When
we don’t take any as self then we are starting to free the mind. That’s the real
purpose of our meditation practice. Once we’ve removed the concept of personality, of this distorted view of individuality, we’ll understand that this is
actually the seed of all our problems. This is where our problems come from.
<span class="pdfpage">52</span>  You’ll start to notice that actually when I’m being really selfish and I have a
very strong sense of self, there is quite a lot of dukkha associated with that.
Lots of self, lots of dukkha. Reduce your sense of self, reduce your dukkha.
A little bit of self, a little bit of dukkha. No self, no dukkha. The cessation
of  dukkha  is  completed  when  the  sense  of  self  is  fully  removed.  Dukkha
is dependent on me, mine and I. Dependent on this sense of self arising in
the present moment. Our conceptions of «I am» are based upon this present
moment  experience  continuously  multiplying  moment  after  moment  after
moment. It becomes so continuous, it flows so uninterruptedly, so mechanically that we don’t actually see what’s going on. Luckily 26 centuries ago
the Buddha saw what was going on and he was able to teach what he came
to know for himself. Not only that people that he taught were also able to
understand  the  nature  of  reality  and  they  also  became  enlightened  beings.
And  so  this  tradition  has  passed  down  to  us. There  are  still  people  on  the
planet who are enlightened. They had followed the teaching and completed
the  training.  I  have  met  them,  enlightened  beings  following  the  teaching.
This  is  our  opportunity  to  practice  this  wonderful  teaching,  to  realize  the
true  nature  of  the  mind  and  body  process,  to  stop  identifying  with  it. The
stuff is still going to be arising. Your old karma is still going to manifest in
this live. Mind and body process will still keep bubbling away, but the more
you can remove your sense of self, the more pleasant you’ll find the whole
experience.  If  you  can  completely  remove  your  sense  of  self  from  nature,
from this mind and body process that is arising and passing away, then you’ll
have found a state of freedom. A state of peace. A state of comfort. A state of
great bliss. A state of loving kindness and compassion for other beings. And
this is where our Vipassana practice is heading.</p>
<p>You will need to obtain a level of concentration, you will need to be
mindful  continuously  from  moment  to  moment.  It’s  through  continuous
mindfulness, continuous attention to what is actually going on in the present moment that concentration arises. If we can actively note what’s going
on and we do that continuously, we are aware, we’re witnessing, observing,
we’re paying attention but we’re not interfering with what’s going on. We’re
just watching. We are the detached watcher. Just being attentive observing.
Witnessing is taking place. This is the power of mindfulness and wisdom.
<span class="pdfpage">53</span>  We’ll be talking more about them as the week goes on.</p>
<p>So we are establishing our awareness in the present moment, we are
activating our awareness continuously. In the beginning stages of the practice you’ll need to do this very often. Your mind will wander here and there.
You go into the past and future thinking about various things. You will need
to  reactivate  your  awareness  and  bring  it  back  into  the  present  and  know
what is the object of consciousness. Keep bringing your awareness back into
the present and seeing what’s there. That’s what our practice is all about. If
you  can  do  this  continuously,  keep  bringing  yourself  back  to  the  present,
keep bringing yourself back, what happens is that the mind stabilizes in this
mode of awareness. In the beginning stages that’s difficult just to get into it
for a few seconds, just to get into this awareness, that you’ll be there and
that you’re present with what’s going on. And then your mind will run away
again. You’ll follow the breath a little bit, you can be there with it and then
your mind will run away again. This is very normal. Anyone who has trained
a dog will know. You have to train it. It will take some patience, it will take
some effort but eventually the dog understands that it has to go and piddle
outside. You bring it in, it starts to piddle, you put it outside again. It comes
back inside, it gets comfortable, it starts a little piddle, you take it outside
and it does it out there. Eventually it knows that it has to go outside to go to
the toilet. In our meditation practice as well, if we continuously keep averting our intention and the awareness to the present moment, our mind starts to
learn, starting to train our mind to come back into the present. At the beginning it’s difficult, but after a while, we get used to it.</p>
</section>
<section id="noting-knowing-letting-go">
<h2><span class="section-number">3.2. </span>Noting, Knowing, Letting go</h2>
<p>We activate our awareness. What’s there? We note it! When I say «we
note  it»  that  means,  we  just  make  a  recognition  in  our  mind. And  this  is
what’s there. Just that! We are just noting it.</p>
<p>The second part of our operation is, we know the object. We note what’s
there and then we know it. We know it in a very special way. We know it as
an object. We see it for what it actually is. We know it as an independent,
discrete  event  that’s  occurring.  It’s  either  a  mental  event  or  it’s  a  physical
event. It’s impermanent, we know it’s arisen, it’s there, we watch it and it
<span class="pdfpage">54</span>  passes away. We understand the nature of it. This is a conditioned, dependently arisen object, it’s out of control. It has arisen when its conditions are
in place and it has passed away when those conditions are no longer there.
It’s an independent, dependently arisen, conditioned mental or physical phenomena. It has probably been subjectified. It has probably been identified as
being me and mine. And so dukkha arises in that moment. If our awareness
can be sharp enough, if we can note and know the object so that craving for
being doesn’t have a chance to enter into the moment, then that’s a moment
of freedom. That’s a moment of cessation of dukkha. We can free the mind
in that moment.</p>
<p>So what we do is we note whatever’s there, we know it – by knowing
I  mean  we  step  back  from  it,  disengage  from  it,  stop  identifying  with  it,
we see it just as it is, put a little fence around it, if you like, or build a wall
around it or put it up on a high shelf, there it is, it’s not me, it’s not mine, it’s
not I. It could be «hearing». It’s not «I am hearing». There is some hearing
occurring. When we look at our physical sensations, normally, we look at it
from a subjective point of view. «My painful knee». There is some physical
sensations that is there. That’s all it is. There is some unpleasantness that’s
there, that’s all it is. There is a physical object, there is a mental object and
there is a subjectification of that. My painful knee. Three things are going
on there. We can note them. We can note and know them so that our mind
doesn’t get trapped, that it doesn’t get engaged, that it doesn’t get immured
with the object and it passes away. This is how the letting go process takes
place in the present moment.</p>
<p>We activate our awareness, we note what’s there, we step back from it,
not engaging with it in any way, we’re not thinking about it or analyzing it,
we are just stepping back from it and then we watch it pass away. It arises,
we note it, we step back and it passes away. It arises, we note it, we step back
and it passes away. We do this over and over and over again. This is what
our  meditation  practice  is  all  about.  Freeing  the  mind,  freeing  consciousness from the mind. Freeing consciousness from the mind and body process.
Consciousness, which is like a bowl; mind and body are like the fruit that
is  sitting  in  the  bowl. Without  a  bowl  the  fruit  can’t  have  a  sit. You  can’t
have a bowl that is just empty. It’s got to have something in it. So they’re
<span class="pdfpage">55</span>  in kind of a relationship, this bowl and this fruit. They have to go together.
Consciousness is the bowl that allows the fruit to be there. The fruit can only
be there if there’s a consciousness. So they are in this symbiotic relationship
causing and effecting each other. Mind and body sometimes is the cause of
consciousness.  Consciousness  is  sometimes  the  cause  of  mind  and  body.
They are arising and passing away together. We need to be able to see this
in real-time.</p>
<p>To do this we need to be able to note and know and let go. Note, know
and let go. Note, know and let go. Note, know and let go. And we need to
do it continuously. We need to do it rapidly. The more rapidly you can do
the practice, the quicker you’re letting go will take place. You will be able
to see things more and more clearly. In the beginning it takes a lot of effort
to  put  forth  this  noting,  doing  this  noting,  being  aware  of  exactly  what  is
the  content  of  your  consciousness  right  now. What’s  happening  now:  Is  it
hearing? Is it seeing? Is it smelling? Is it tasting? What is it now? What is
happening now? Is it hearing? Is it seeing? Smelling? Tasting? Touching?
The five sense doors are constantly stimulated by the environment. If there
are  sounds,  hearing  occurs.  If  there  are  visible  forms,  seeing  occurs.  The
body is touching this mat, touching is occurring! The body is feeling a little
bit warm, warmth is occurring there! Vibration is there. These physical and
mental phenomena are going on all over the place continuously arising and
passing away. If we are aware in the present moment, we can block craving
from entering the moment and there is a moment of freedom.</p>
<p>If we’re unaware of the moment, then craving will enter the moment
and  cause,  what  the  Buddha  called  dukkha,  this  unsatisfactory  state  of
affairs,  where  the  mind  and  body  process  have  become  subjectified. They
think they are somebody. Trapped! We are trapped in a sense of self. We are
trapped in the matrix. Luckily for us, if we can note and know and let go and
keep noting and keep noting and keep noting, moment after moment after
moment, moment after moment, what happens, is this mode of perception
stabilizes. The  mind  becomes  concentrated  and  starts  to  see  things  in  this
mode more frequently, more commonly, more often, continuously. The curtain opens and we start to see what is really going on in the present moment.
We see things as they really are. The letting go mechanism takes place and
<span class="pdfpage">56</span>  we are free in that moment. All we have to do is extend that moment out,
keep extending our awareness in the present, keep extending our wisdom,
which de-identifies with things. Being aware in the present moment is just
not  enough. Awareness  will  take  us  to  the  present  and  we’ll  know  what’s
there but we need wisdom as well. Wisdom allows not to get engaged with
the object. We note it and we are right there with it. Wisdom is that which
steps back. So we are noting and we are knowing. The result of this is letting go. We are noting, knowing, letting go. Whatever physical phenomena
is  arising  in  the  body,  make  a  note  of  it.  Whatever  mental  phenomena  is
arising, make a note of it. Whether it’s an emotional state or a judging state
or complaining state or if it’s pleasantness or if it’s unpleasantness or if it’s
hot or if it’s tired, if it’s hungry, what ever is going on. Vipassana meditation
is paying attention to just what is. We are not trying to create anything special. We are trying to observe nature as it bubbles up. We want to see it as it
comes up completely undisturbed. We are not trying to manipulate the mind
and  body  process. We  are  trying  to  let  it  go. We  are  trying  to  completely
and totally detach from it, so it can just do its thing without the sense of me
being in there.</p>
<p>When  you  experience  that  for  yourself,  you  will  experience  a  very
large amount of bliss, you will be very happy, very pleased and very free.
This is where our meditation practice goes.</p>
<p>We are not having reactions to the objects, we are not trying to like or
dislike them. We are just allowing them to arise and pass away. We are not
judging things as being good or bad. We are not comparing things. The mind
often likes to compare. It likes to go into the past. To think about how it was
then and how it is now. It likes to compare with the future. How much better
it’s going to be in the future compared to what it is now.</p>
<p>So just be aware of whatever is occurring without any entanglements.
We are going to follow the breath and use that as a conceptual framework to
keep us in the present as we observe what is going on. Watch things as they
occur. As our mindfulness gradually becomes more constant, more continuous and more powerful, the mind starts to stabilize in various levels, in various stages. Depending on the stage of stability, on the level of concentration
you will see things as they really are up to that level. The more you can let
<span class="pdfpage">57</span>  go of, the more stable your awareness will become. So it will become concentrated. The mind will enter a concentrated state of samadhi. It will be able
to see things as they really are.</p>
<p><em>The most important thing to be aware of is whatever object is arising</em>
<em>in  the  moment.  That’s  the  most  important  thing  to  note.</em>
If  you  are  unsure
of  what  you  need  to  be  noting,  whatever  is  there  is  the  answer. Whatever
is  arising  that’s  what  we  pay  attention  to. We  are  not  trying  to  create  any
special object. Just whatever is there. Activate your awareness in the present.  What’s  there?  What  are  you  thinking  about?  What  is  your  emotional
state? Are you feeling happy? Is there pleasantness in the moment or is there
unpleasantness in the moment? Is there some physical sensations occurring
in the moment? Is there any emotional state occurring? Are you looping on
something? Are  you  thinking  about  something? Are  you  becoming  angry
about something? Are you disliking something? Have a look at that! Maybe
you’re becoming happy about something.</p>
<p>Our mindfulness meditation is the practice of non-reaction. We are not
reacting, we are not judging. Mindfulness is a process which is not judging.
You  are  not  calling  things  as  good  or  bad. That  is  a  reaction  of  the  mind.
Things  are  as  they  are!  They  are  perfectly  fine!  Of  course,  we  can  make
trouble by saying this is good or this is bad. Things are as they are. So our
practice is just to be aware of whatever is occurring.</p>
<p>We  can  listen  to  something.  We  can  hear  those  insects  in  the  background there. We can listen. That involves somebody who is listening. Hearing doesn’t involve anybody. Hearing is occurring. Hearing is a natural state.
There  is  holes  in  your  head,  there  is  sound  outside.  Ear  drum  and  sound
meeting together, ear consciousness arising. It doesn’t belong to anyone. It’s
not you. It’s not yours.</p>
<p>Why  are  you  identifying  with  it? Why  are  you  becoming  upset  with
it? «Oh, that sound is happening to me!» Hmm, you have appropriated that
sound! You are unable to note it in the present moment, ’hearing, hearing’,
that is what is actually happening right now. Hearing process is activated.
So  we  are  aware  that  hearing  is  occurring. When  we  understand  it  as  just
hearing, hearing is just hearing. It’s not «I am hearing something» or «I am
listening». When we can see it as just hearing, only that, then we have freed
<span class="pdfpage">58</span>  the mind from the subjectivity that we have become involved with – if we
can note and know fast enough, if we can keep noting continuously to block
this sense of self from getting into the sense perception process.</p>
<p>It is constantly trying to enter. Craving is constantly there, swirling like
a cloud in our present moment experience. It wants to be. This is its very
nature.  Craving  really,  really  wants  to  be  somebody.  It  really  wants  to  be
something. Think about it! It is all you are thinking about. «I want to be this,
I want to study this, I want to study that, I want to be this person, I want to
be that, I want to have this, I want to have that job title, this car, this amount
of money.» It wants to be. It doesn’t matter, unfortunately for us, it doesn’t
matter what it wants to be. It attaches to both pleasant and unpleasant experiences. It gains the sense of self from the pleasant experiences, «I am happy,
this is great», and it gains a sense of self from the unpleasant experiences.
«This is awful, what am I doing here».</p>
<p>All of those thoughts, when they are unseen, when we are unmindful
of them, when we haven’t been able to note and know in the present moment
exactly what that mind state is, we get sucked into it! We get sucked into it
and start identifying with it. The pleasantness is no longer just pleasantness.
It is pleasantness for me. The unpleasantness, it’s just unpleasantness. Oh,
there is some unpleasantness arising. If we note it and know it, we can free
our mind from that unpleasantness. If we don’t see it fast enough, we will
get sucked into it. Absorbed into it. That unpleasantness will be happening
to me. It will be happening for me. And so we dukkher ourselves and bring
dukkha  into  the  moment  through  unawareness. When  we  have  awareness,
dukkha ceases.</p>
<p>When we have no awareness, dukkha is arising. It’s two sides of the
coin. You can choose how you want to live your life in the present moment.
If you want to be aware, mindful and fully aware of what your mental state
is, so that you can note it, know it and let it go, then you can live in freedom
from this onslaught of craving to be. If you don’t want to do that, if you just
want to let it come into every sense experience that you have got, create a
sense of self, prepare yourself for the ups and downs of life, the vicissitudes
of life. Lots of unpleasantness, lots of pleasantness. You’ll be swirling like in
a washing machine. Swirling around. Swirling around by being conditioned
<span class="pdfpage">59</span>  by pleasantness and unpleasantness if you are unable to note it, know it and
let it go.</p>
<p>Our  meditation  technique  this  week  is  designed  to  understand  the
nature of our mind. To see how it is functioning, real data in real-time. And
you’re not just listening to me telling you about this, you’re going to practice  it. We  are  going  to  witness  it  for  ourselves. The  Buddha’s  teaching  is
not something you believe in. It is not a belief-system. The Buddha never
asked us to believe something. He asked us to investigate for ourselves and
to understand for ourselves. That is what the Buddha’s teaching is all about.
It’s about understanding. He never says, hey, come and believe me. He says,
have a look at that and understand it. He never asked us to believe anything.
He asked us just to do the practice and experience it for ourselves. You will
all be able to experience some level of dhamma on this retreat. To some level
or another, you will all experience some aspect of nature that is arising and
passing away in your mental and physical process.</p>
<p>If we don’t observe what is going on, when we see something or when
we hear something, then we are very quick to react. We normally react with
aversion  or  attraction,  attachment.  If  it  is  pleasant,  we’ll  like  it,  we  want
it, more. If it is unpleasant, we dislike it, we push it away, we get rid of it.
This is what we do. If we are unmindful, we just go through life, processing
things in this way. Unpleasant and push away. Pleasant, more. Unpleasant,
push away. Pleasant, more. If we are surrounded by unpleasantness, then we
will have to work out a way to try to escape by searching for something pleasurable. Trying to open the fridge door, get some food out, put the music on,
find some kind of pleasurable distraction to take us away from the present
moment. Up until now, our only way to be dealing with any dukkha-states
has been through sensuality. Trying to find something nice to eat, something
nice to look at, something nice to listen to, something nice to touch of clothing, touch of another person. We go searching for those things. Drugs, for
alcohol, for sex, for food, gambling. We search for things to pull us out from
our dukkha.</p>
<p>Dukkha is manifesting in the present moment continuously. And this is
the first noble truth. The Buddha said, there is dukkha. He’s doesn’t say, you
are dukkha. He doesn’t say, your life is dukkha. He doesn’t say, the world
<span class="pdfpage">60</span>  is dukkha. All he says is, there is dukkha. There it is! Right there! Where?
Here! This thing. This is where dukkha is arising, and this is where dukkha
is ceasing. Only here! Dukkha is not out there. Suffering, the Buddha is talking about, is not outside. He is talking about this thing here. So let’s have a
look inside. See if you can see this dukkha arising in the present moment. If
we can see the dukkha that is arising in the present moment, we will also see
the craving that produces that dukkha and also see where that dukkha ceases
to exist. It’s called walking the noble eightfold path and we’ll be doing that
this week.</p>
<p>When we see things that we like, when we hear things that are pleasant,
we just take those things as being good things. We like them, we love them,
we want to get them, we want to hold them, we want to keep them, we want
to become the owner of them. That is mine, that is happening to me. If it is
not mine, it’s not good enough. Living in a fancy house, wow, it would be
great, if we owned that place. Why? What is great about owning it? Anyway
you get to live in it already, why do you need to own it? Why will owning
be any better? It’s just the story of your self. The story of me. It wants stuff,
it clings and tries to hold on to stuff. It tries to accumulate things. It’s constantly seeing what the mind, what craving is doing. It’s just trying to build
an  identity  for  itself.  It  is  very  effective,  it’s  very  skillful,  it  does  so  very
efficiently. It’s creating a personality, building an identity for itself and each
moment  is  used  as  a  little  backup,  a  little  prop,  a  little  crutch  to  keep  the
show rolling. To keep this mirage of a person rolling on. It keeps having to
identify to things in the present moment to keep backing it up. To keep backing up the story that this is somebody. That there is somebody here.</p>
<p>Vipassana  insight  blows  this  apart. When  we  see  things  clearly  with
insight,  we  understand  that  things  are  impermanent,  things  are  unsatisfactory and things are ultimately out-of-control and non-self. They don’t belong
to anybody. It’s not happening to anyone. It’s just happening. How it happens, we will talk about as the days go on. Why it’s happening, we’ll talk
about as the days go on.</p>
<p>For our purposes here today, it’s happening. All we have to do is observe
it. We have to watch it. We are watching the physical sensations in the body.
Really pay attention to the movement inside the body when the breath goes
<span class="pdfpage">61</span>  in and out. Don’t pay so much attention to the breath. Pay a lot of attention
to the sensations created by the breath. What does it feel like to be inside the
body knowing those physical sensations? So just be mindful of whatever is
arising in the present moment. That’s what our practice is all about. We are
noting, we are knowing and we are letting go moment after moment after
moment. And this leads us to a state of concentration, a stabilized mode of
perception in which we start to see things as they really are. When we see
things as they really are, the mind can no longer build a sense of self from
that object in that present moment. If you see something clearly with Vipassana insight, it’s impossible for consciousness to build a story and identify
with that object. We have seen it clearly. Clear seeing has taken place. You
will stop identifying with that physical sensation. It’s not me, mine or I. You
will  stop  identifying  with  that  thought  process,  that  habitual  craving  that
you may have. You will stop identifying with some aversion state that often
arises. You will stop identifying with many different things if you can keep
your awareness in the present moment, noting, knowing and letting go. So
that is what our practice is all about this week.</p>
<p>We are going to do some walking meditation now. Just to remind you
about the walking meditation. We find a place outside, nice and calm, come
to attention, standing, become aware of the standing posture, feel the feet as
they are touching the floor, touching the sand or wherever you are standing,
come inside the body, lower your head, keep your mind inside the body, don’t
allow it to go wandering into the jungle, wandering on to somebody’s body.
Keep your mind inside and start gently making movements lifting, moving,
placing. Lifting, moving, placing. And try to walk from one end to the other
end. It can be 12 or 15 steps, lifting, moving, placing, lifting, moving, placing. Try to take each one as a single event. Lifting. Finished. Moving. Finished. Placing. Finished. Lifting. Finished. Moving. Finished. Placing. Finished. Dividing your experience up into discrete individual moments where
you can note and see what is happening in that present moment experience.
We are going to start to divide the stream of your life up and start just to
divide and conquer, if you like, the flow of mental and physical phenomena
arising and passing away extremely rapid up until now. Your life has very
<span class="pdfpage">62</span>  successfully  fooled  you,  believing  that  you  are  somebody. This Vipassana
is going to remove this false view so that you can start to live in a lot more
freedom and a lot more peace and a lot less dukkha.</p>
</section>
</section>


            <div class="clearer"></div>
          </div>
      </div>
      <div class="clearer"></div>
    </div>
  </body>
</html>