<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
  <head>
    <meta charset="utf-8" />
    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0" /><meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1" />

    <title>6. Day 2, afternoon</title>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="_static/pygments.css" />
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="_static/epub.css" />
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="_static/custom.css" /> 
  </head><body>

    <div class="document">
      <div class="documentwrapper">
          <div class="body" role="main">
            
  <section id="day-2-afternoon">
<h1><span class="section-number">6. </span>Day 2, afternoon</h1>
<iframe width="100%" height="120" src="https://www.mixcloud.com/widget/iframe/?feed=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.mixcloud.com%2Fanthonymarkwell%2Fday-2-afternoon-talk%2F&amp;hide_cover=1" frameborder="0"></iframe>
<p>We  are  going  to  have  a  look  at  the  mental  aspect  of  our  experience.
We are going to look at what is known as
<em>vedana</em>
or feeling. It plays a very
important role in the Buddha’s teaching. Vedana or feeling is one of the four
satipatthanas. It’s the second satipatthana, the second foundation of mindfulness.</p>
<p>We use the analogy of the Shwedagon pagoda in Yangon, Myanmar.
There is 100 meter tall pagoda on top of a huge platform. In order to get to
that platform, you need to walk up one of four gigantic staircases. You can
use any of the stairways to walk up to the platform, to walk up and see the
pagoda.</p>
<p>Here we are using the pagoda as an analogy for our present moment
experience  and  we’re  using  the  four  staircases  for  the  four  foundations  of
mindfulness. We can establish awareness in the present moment using one of
the four foundations. You can use the body door, that we have been looking
at already – the physical sensations and postures of the body. We can also
use feeling – pleasantness and unpleasantness. We can use our mind state in
that  present  moment  experience  as  a  foundation  for  mindfulness. And  we
can also use thoughts or reactions, that come in the present moment experience as a foundation for mindfulness. Depending on your skill, you can use
anyone  of  the  four  foundations  of  mindfulness  to  establish  awareness  and
<span class="pdfpage">100</span>  wisdom in the present moment. You can choose. All four are available. Just
like  the  stairways  that  lead  to  the  pagoda  platform,  they  are  all  available
for us. We can use the body, feelings, emotions or thoughts to establish our
awareness in the present moment.</p>
<section id="feeling">
<h2><span class="section-number">6.1. </span>Feeling</h2>
<p>So feeling is one of the four foundations of mindfulness. Feeling has
been  isolated  because  of  importance  of  it’s  role  in  the  Buddha’s  teaching.
Feeling is also one of the five aggregates. Again it’s isolated from the other
mental aggregates of perception and sankharas, conditional formations. It’s
part of nama, the mind, but it’s separated. Feeling also plays an important
role in the
<em>paticca samuppada</em>, dependent origination, as feeling is the cause
and condition for craving. Craving is the cause and condition for dukkha. So
feeling plays a very important role in the teachings of the Buddha. So we
need to understand precisely what feeling is.</p>
<p>Feeling or
<em>vedana</em>
is the cause and condition for delight and lust. It’s
based on feeling, particularly pleasant feeling, that we start liking things, we
start delighting in things. Lust arises in the mind. Lust for being, craving for
being arises.</p>
<p>Feeling  is  simply  the  affective  tone,  or  affective  component  of  our
experience.  It’s  the  flavor  of  our  experience.  Feeling  is  either  pleasant,
unpleasant  or  neutral.  There  are  three  types  of  feeling:  pleasant,  unpleasant,  neutral.  Structurally  one  type  of  feeling  will  be  arising  in  the  present
moment,  continuously,  with  the  other  of  the  five  aggregates,  and  passing
away. Arises and passes away. It is just the flavor. It’s not the physical sensations in the body – they are the four elements, they are physical – it is not
the emotional state, that we find ourselves in sometimes, that is a mind state.
Feeling is something different. Feeling is just the unpleasantness of an experience or pleasantness of an experience, just that. Yet it plays an enormous
role,  because  feeling  is  known  as  the
<em>citta  sankhara</em>.  Or  the  mind  conditioner. Our minds have been conditioned by feeling. We are going to need to
understand feeling, not only on a general level, but on an intuitional level,
on a meditational level. We are going to have to see for ourselves how pleasant feeling conditions liking and craving that leads to dukkha, and unpleasant <span class="pdfpage">101</span>  feeling conditions disliking and aversion which also leads to dukkha, if
feeling is not noted and known. Then it will be appropriated and identified
with, it will be subjectified, it will be for me. As it’s arising in nature, it’s just
pleasantness or unpleasantness arising and passing away. It doesn’t belong to
anybody. It’s just a feature of the mind and body process. It is just one part,
the tone or the flavor of the experience whether it’s pleasant or unpleasant.</p>
<p>We need to really note it quickly, when it starts to arise, before it starts
to condition the mind and before we loose our awareness and wisdom in the
present moment, before we get taken away by a pleasant story or an unpleasant experience. We need to be able to note this in the present moment clearly.
Feelings are impermanent, they arise and pass away, extremely rapidly,
they  are  conditioned,  they  are  dependently  arisen. They  are  the  subject  to
fading away and ceasing.</p>
<p>There are six types of feeling: feeling born of eye contact, of ear contact, of nose contact, of tongue contact, of body contact, and feeling born of
mind contact. Contact is that type of state where our internal base and the
external objects, that relate to that base, contact each other and consciousness  arises.  Consciousness  arises  joined  with  feeling. They  arise  and  pass
away.
<em>Mind and matter and consciousness arise and pass away together at</em>
<em>the six sense doors.</em>
So there is feeling which can be pleasant, unpleasant or
neutral at the eye door, that can be pleasant, unpleasant or neutral at the ear
door, mind door and so on.</p>
<p>If you feel a pleasant feeling, you won’t feel an unpleasant or neutral
feeling at that moment. Feeling is mutually exclusive to the moment. It is
either pleasant, unpleasant or neutral. And then it passes away. Of course,
you  can  have  all  kinds  of  thoughts  or  emotional  states  towards  a  feeling.
Feeling will arise and pass away, rapidly replacing one another.</p>
<p>The Buddha was asked by the wanderer Pataliputta:
<em>«Why does feeling arise in the present moment? Why in every single moment is it pleasant,
unpleasant, neutral? Why is that part of the structure of our experience, the</em>
<em>structure, the nature that we’re subjected to?»</em>
–
<em>«Having done an intentional
action through body, speech and mind whose resultant is pleasant, one feels
pleasure. Having done an intentional action through body, speech and mind
– that’s karma, having created some karma, some intentional action, some
<span class="pdfpage">102</span>  cetana; cetana, intention, is karma – whose resultant is unpleasant, one feels</em>
<em>unpleasantness.»</em>
So the feelings that we experience in the present moment
are the resultants of old intentional structures. Old karma, that we have created. That remains latent.
<em>Kama sati</em>, karmic energy, as a potentiality, only
has an opportunity to arise when its conditions are in place. If there is some
condition in place for it to hatch and manifest, to bloom, then it will! And
it will give its fruit. Either pleasant or unpleasant or neutral. If the karma
that was created was wholesome or unwholesome than the resultant will be
experienced as pleasant or unpleasant feeling, respectively.</p>
<p>When they bubble up, they don’t belong to anybody. It’s not you, you
didn’t create an intentional structure.
<em>There is nobody here that is creating</em>
<em>karma. Karma is creating itself.</em>
Reaction. The five aggregates are creating
themselves  every  moment. And  when  that  resultant  bubbles  up,  if  we  are
unmindful, if we fail to activate our awareness and wisdom in the present
moment and note and know it, see it clearly and let go of it, so that it is not
a base for the arising of self, then that feeling will simply be appropriated
and identified with. The feeling will happen to me, it will be mine, the feeling will be subjectified. Then we just react to it with liking if it’s pleasant or
with disliking if it’s unpleasant. Of course that reaction is new karma. That’s
a new intentional structure through body, speech and mind which will give
a resultant to be experienced as pleasant or unpleasant feeling. So it keeps
looping. Around and around like this. This is what ignorance is. That is the
nature of ignorance. Unawareness in the present moment. If we are unable to
see this structure happening in real-time in our mediation practice, we won’t
fully understand what it is to be stuck in samsara. This is a very tight and
concrete structure. It fits together very well. It has been operating successfully and managing itself for a very long time. This is its latest manifestation
sitting here on the meditation mat.</p>
<p>Receiving  resultants,  reacting  towards  them,  creating  new  karma,
receiving  resultants,  reacting  towards  them,  creating  new  karma,  receiving resultants, reacting, creating new karma – moment after moment. Each
of  these  moments  giving  us  a  little  taste  of  me  or  mine. When  these  little
moments are added up together they produce a sense of I, a self, a me, an
identity. They give this mind and body process, which is flowing on in nature,
<span class="pdfpage">103</span>  to believe it is somebody. It’s alive. It’s calling itself something. In fact, our
parents called it something. We started to maintain that name as well.</p>
<p>We need to be very careful about pleasantness or unpleasantness. Pleasantness and unpleasantness is the trigger. Whenever you find this triggering
you, whenever you find yourself reacting, if you feel you’re about to explode
in anger, or you can feel an addiction urge arising, a liking and a disliking, a
pushing and pulling away, have a look at the feeling. Start to note the pleasantness or unpleasantness of the situation and you will be able to free your
mind from those states. The most important thing is not to appropriate feeling or identify with it. The Buddha tells us, that the way leading to the origination of identity view, to the arising of identity view, we regard the internal
base, the external base, the consciousness that arises when these two meet
together,  and  the  feeling  born  from  those  bases  touching  together.  When
we take these things as mine, this I am, this is myself, that’s when identity
view arises. Identity view ceases when we stop appropriating and identifying the internal base, the external object, the consciousness that arises in that
moment (the knowing), the contact of that base and the feeling of that base.
These five things. If we can stop appropriating and identifying with them at
the six sense bases, then we are free. We are free of identity view. Identity
view is the large leash that keeps us bound to samsara. It’s the view that the
mind and body process comes to believe that it is someone. The Buddha’s
teaching is to remove that sense of I from the picture. Remove the sense of
me from our experience so that we can go back to nature. The Buddha says,
that all the conditioned phenomena, all the mental and physical phenomena,
that we are identifying with are dukkha. The whole lot. All the physical sensations, all the mental sensations, the thoughts, the emotions, the pleasant,
the unpleasant, all of them. It’s all conditioned nonsense arising and passing
away. It doesn’t belong to anybody. We need to be able to see this if we want
to breakthrough. If you want to evolve as a spiritual being and remove the
sense of self, remove the ego, remove the duality, that we have put into the
moment, where there is a me and a world. That’s how we are operating. With
separation. When we remove the sense of self, there is no separation at all.
There is a knowing. And it’s blissful.</p>
<p>We need to understand and see these feelings as impermanent, as suffering <span class="pdfpage">104</span>  and as non-self. Of course pleasantness is going to arise. The Buddha
still calls it dukkha. It’s important to understand here, what the Buddha is
asking  us  to  let  go  of,  is  not  the  pleasant  feeling  but  the  attachment  and
identification that we developed towards pleasant feeling. Pleasant feelings
will arise, it is their nature to arise, old karma is unfolding. You will experience some pleasantness and some unpleasantness in your life. And there
is nothing wrong with that. That is nature. What the Buddha’s teaching is
all about, is stopping the identification with the feelings. That gives us the
problem.  When  we  start  identifying  with  something  unpleasant,  than  it  is
dukkha right away. When we start identifying with something pleasant, then
it is dukkha when that object passes away, when we loose it. Dukkha arises
through attachment. Freedom arises through non-attachment.</p>
<p>But don’t think that you have to give up all those special activities that
you like to do. You don’t have to give up your life to practice the Buddha’s
teaching.  Pleasantness,  pleasant  activities,  friends  who  are  nice,  these  are
all ok things. You can still eat, go on holidays, listen to music but don’t get
attached to the pleasantness. Stop identifying with it and free yourself from
it. Then you will be able to enjoy the world without an ego getting in the
way. It’s a much higher, more fulfilling sense of enjoyment. There is a bliss
that arises when you can let go of the pleasure that’s created through sensuality. At the moment we don’t see anything higher than the pleasures that arise
through the five physical sense doors. They give us so much pleasure! Or we
pleasure ourselves through our own thinking, our own rumination.</p>
<p>In  the  dependent  origination,  between  the  six  sense  bases  and  feeling is what is known as contact or
<em>phassa</em>.
<em>Phassa is the point in the sense
perception  process,  where  we  activate  our  awareness  and  note,  know  and</em>
<em>let  go  right  at  the  point  where  consciousness  is  arising.</em>
When  there  is  an
internal base and an object, consciousness arises. Ear consciousness arises
when there is an ear and a sound. Body consciousness arises when there is
a body and something touching the body. Sight consciousness arises when
you have an eye ball and there is sufficient light and visible forms available.
When these two touch together, it is called contact. They cause the arising
of consciousness in the present moment. We need to be able to note right at
that point of contact. Right at the six sense bases where they’re arising and
<span class="pdfpage">105</span>  passing away. It’s right at that point of contact, if it’s unnoted and unknown,
that craving enters the sense perception process. Craving for being gets in
there. This very strong desire to be something, to become somebody. Unfortunately it’s rife in our society. Our whole education system is pushing us to
become something. The subjects we have to choose. The society, our family,
friends  all  are  pushing  us  to  become  something. This  craving  for  being  is
defilement. It is the cause of dukkha. The Buddha told us to note it, know
it and let it go. Free our mind from it. Craving for being has an opportunity
to enter the sense perception process right at the point of contact. It’s conditioned by the feeling that’s arising there.</p>
<p>In the
<em>Madupindika sutta</em>, the Buddha gives a very succinct description of the sense perception process.
<em>«When there is eye and physical forms,
eye consciousness arises, the meeting of the three is contact, with contact</em>
<em>as condition feeling.</em>
(The grammar then changes in the Pali text.)
<em>What one
feels,  that  one  perceives.  What  one  perceives  that  one  thinks  about.  What</em>
<em>one thinks about that one mentally proliferates.»</em>
Mental proliferation means
appropriation and identification. It means taking things as mine, this I am,
this  is  myself.  Up  to  the  point  of  feeling,  the  sense  perception  process  is
objective. There is no subjectivity in there. Eye, plus form, eye consciousness  arises,  the  meeting  of  the  three  is  contact,  with  contact  as  condition,
feeling. This is an impersonal process that is happening to nobody. If there is
no awareness and wisdom in that moment, when this contact is taking place,
then craving sneaks in. What one feels, that one perceives. What one perceives, that one thinks about. It is already starting happening to somebody.
The feelings and the perceptions and the thoughts are for somebody, happening to somebody. They are mine. So subjectification has taken place. And
then mental proliferation besets a person with respect to past, present and
future visible forms cognized through the eye. It happens extremely rapidly.
You will need to be continuous in your meditation practice to be able
to catch it. You won’t catch it quickly or easily. But if you are diligent, if
you  are  practicing  correctly,  moment  after  moment,  without  any  desire  to
try and get any results – we need to drop that desire, we need to check our
attitude – if you are just practicing continuously, «bum», and you will drop
into the present moment, and you will see things as they are. The mental and
<span class="pdfpage">106</span>  physical phenomena will become quite clear to you. You will be able to see
them arising and passing in the moment, you will be able to see mental and
physical phenomena, that have been subjectified and are under the control
of craving, and you will be able to see mental and physical phenomena, that
have escaped the subjectification process, that are free data, that pass away,
that are no longer useful or able to continue the illusion that there is somebody here. It is only because we are not looking that we think we are someone. As soon as you start looking, you won’t be able to find anyone there. It
is impersonal. It’s just a natural process unfolding, like a tree growing in the
forest! It starts small, then grows up, then gives fruit, and then it gets old and
falls over. Nothing much different than this body here. It gets born, it grows
old, it gets sick and dies. All the time we’re holding on to it preciously thinking it’s me. Actually it’s a huge burden.</p>
<p>It is a real hassle to have a body. You have to take it everywhere, you
have to feed it, you have to wash it, clean it and cloth it, make it look fancy
sometimes. It is like a 30 kg backpack. You have to take it all over the place
with  you.  It’s  got  six  radars  out  there  collecting  information  through  the
sense doors. We spend most of our lives taking care of this body. We think
it is really important. It is just earth, water, fire and air. It’s just the four elements arising and passing away. Because it has got a nice conceptual structure around it, we have come to think it is me. We are willing to work for 50
years, to borrow large amounts of money from the bank to buy a concrete
room to keep it at night. Why are we doing that? We need a fancy room to
keep it, this rotten log of festeringness. If we don’t see it clearly we’ll take it
very seriously, we take our life very seriously. We’ll take ourselves very seriously. We get upset when people challenge it. When we start to see it more
clearly though, it starts to loose its importance to us.</p>
<p>So the six sense bases of contact are impermanent and are subject to
change. A pleasant feeling or an unpleasant feeling that arises from impermanent bases, do you think that such a feeling can possibly be permanent?
No! It is also impermanent. It also passes away very, very rapidly.</p>
<p>Notice  when  the  dog  barks.  It  takes  half  a  second.  It’s  just  a  quick
amount of noise and then it’s gone. Finished, it’s passed away. But our mind
takes this fraction of a second of noise and starts to spin. «What’s that dog
<span class="pdfpage">107</span>  doing here? Why is there a dog here? Which dog is it? I don’t like dogs. My
dog at home…» – and then you get into a fantasy about dog walking. You’re
gone  for  five  minutes…bring  yourself  back  to  the  present  and  start  again.
The early days on the meditation retreat are very much like that. We need to
activate our awareness continuously. Keep activating, keep pulling yourself
back inside. Use the ear door to pull you back in. Sound is always there. We
are not listening to sounds. That means we have gone out if we are listening. We are holding our awareness inside the body, just noting that hearing
is occurring. If you can do that, you’ll find that you can come back to the
present very rapidly. Hold it there for a bit. Bring your mind into the body.
Start to pay attention to the rise and fall. Get a few in, and then, wooop, it’s
gone again. Activate your awareness, come back to the present, keep doing
it. We are just training. We are training the mind as it runs out. We bring it
back. Like when we’re fishing. Bring it back. Than it runs out. Bring it back.
Finally, it is so tired, that we can just bring it in. It won’t find any interest
in going out anymore and we can hold it inside. That’s when our meditation
really starts to stabilize, when we can develop awareness of the body. Full
awareness of the body is what we want to develop.</p>
<p>The importance of feeling and its place in the Buddha’s teaching is also
shown to us by the
<em>Bramachalla sutta</em>
(first discourse in the large collection
Diga Nikaya).
<em>Brama</em>
means the highest,
<em>challa</em>
is a net. The Buddha throws
a net across 62 views. In the Buddha’s time, he identified 62 different views.
There  were  various  philosophers,  recluses  and  meditators  and  priests  and
brahmins. All of them had their own ideas how the world was functioning,
they all had their philosophical standpoint. They all had their different views
on  how  the  sense  of  self  arises  and  what  it  is. All  the  monks  and  nuns  in
Burma have to study it for their exams. It is an important sutta.</p>
<p>It goes something like this:
<em>«When those ascetics and brahmins, who
are  speculators  about  the  self  in  the  past,  who  are  speculators  about  self
in  the  future,  who  have  fixed  views  about  the  self,  who  put  forward  views
about the self in these 62 ways, it is merely the feeling of those who do not
know and do not see, the delight, worry and vacillation of those immersed</em>
<em>in craving.»</em>
These 62 views are all conditioned by contact. Present moment,
contact,  contact  arising  at  the  physical  doors.
<em>«That  all  these  speculators
<span class="pdfpage">108</span>  should  experience  feeling  without  contact  that  is  impossible.  They  experienced  the  feelings,  pleasant,  unpleasant  and  neutral  by  repeated  contact</em>
<em>through the six sense basis. With feeling as condition craving arises.»</em>
Luckily  the  Buddha  gives  us  some  instruction.
<em>«When  a  monk  understands  as
they really are, the arising and passing away of these six sense bases, when
he understands the satisfaction of the six sense bases, when he understands
the danger of the six sense bases, and the escape from them, then he knows
that which goes beyond all these views of self.»</em></p>
<p>So when we understand the point of contact, where feeling is arising,
we understand the arising and passing away of feeling, when we know it to
be an impermanent, dependently arisen, conditioned phenomena. We see it
arising, we see it passing. We see the satisfaction that we get from feeling,
the pleasantness, the joy, the delight and lust we get from feeling, and also
see the danger that feeling presents to us. In fact, that feeling is the cause
and condition to delight and lust and craving. If we see the danger of feeling,
than we are able to let it go. We move beyond feeling. We see the escape
from feeling. So these five things are to be seen and understood. We know
the  arising  of  feeling,  we  make  a  note  when  it’s  arising,  when  it’s  there.
We make a note when it’s passed away. Pleasantness there. Now it’s gone.
We know the arising and passing. We know the satisfaction. We know the
danger. And then we see the escape from it. When we have completely let go
of feeling, in that moment, we’re free. No self arises in that moment. That’s
a moment of freedom.</p>
<p>Our job as meditators is to just extend that moment out indefinitely as
much as we can. In the beginning stages we only get a fraction of a second
as a look but then the curtain opens and stays open for a little bit longer, for
seconds or minutes, maybe for hours where we’re experiencing the mind and
body process without a sense of self. And it’s gone when we are right there
in the present moment. We are free from dukkha.</p>
<p><em>«That one shall here and now make an end of suffering, without abandoning the underlying tendency to lust or pleasant feeling, without abolishing the underlying tendency to aversion for painful feeling, without removing
the underlying tendency to ignorance with regard to neutral feeling, without
abandoning ignorance and arousing true knowledge, this is impossible.</em></p>
<p><em><span class="pdfpage">109</span>  When one is touched by a pleasant feeling, if one delights in it, welcomes  it,  remains  holding  to  it,  then  the  underlying  tendency  to  lust  lies
within one.</em></p>
<p><em>When one is touched by a painful feeling, if one sorrows and grieves
and laments, weeps, beating ones breast and becoming distraught, then the
underlying tendency to aversion still lies within one.</em></p>
<p><em>When  one  is  touched  by  a  neutral  feeling,  if  one  doesn’t  understand
as  it  actually  is,  the  arising,  passing,  the  satisfaction,  the  danger  and  the
escape in regard to that feeling, then the underlying tendency to ignorance
lies within one.»</em></p>
<p>So  you  see  that  coming  to  understand  feeling,  noting  the  pleasantness or unpleasantness of a particular situation is very important if we’re to
remove ourselves from these defilements. If we are to let go of lust, aversion
and ignorance. Greed, hatred and delusion. When we can remove these from
our  present  moment  experience,  then  we  see  that  which  is  beyond,  when
our Vipassana  insight  becomes  strong.
<em>Phassa</em>
or  contact  does  not  yield  a
self. This is the point where the knowledge of arising and passing away is
observed. The Buddha called it the deathless state. He called it the
<em>amata dathu</em>.
<em>Amata</em>, there is no death occurring in that present moment experience
because there is nobody there who dies. It’s the deathless because we moved
beyond the realm of birth and death. Birth and death are concepts that relate
to a person, that relate to an individual. There needs to be somebody before
there  can  be  birth  and  death.  If  the  mind  and  body  process  are  not  thinking of themselves as somebody, if they have escaped that delusion, if they
have uprooted that ignorance in that present moment, if they have developed
awareness and wisdom in that present moment, then they can escape feeling
and they escape dukkha. And they realize the deathless, the arising and passing away of phenomena.</p>
<p>When we are considering feeling, it is important that we don’t get confused between feelings and sensations in the body or mind states in the mind.
To give you a little example, the four foundations of mindfulness, the four
walkways to the pagoda platform, are always available for us to use. We can
walk to the present moment using anyone of the staircases. For example a
mosquito comes and bites you on the arm:</p>
<ul class="simple">
<li><p><span class="pdfpage">110</span> In that present moment experience there can be some tingling, or itching, maybe a little bit of heat occurring. That is a physical sensation.
That’s the first foundation, mindfulness of the body or
<em>kaya-nupassana</em>. We can direct our awareness and wisdom in the present moment on
that physical sensation. We have established mindfulness on the body,
on a physical sensation.</p></li>
<li><p>If we choose to, we can establish our awareness on the unpleasantness
of that situation. There is also an experience of unpleasantness. We can
establish  our  awareness  just  on  the  unpleasantness.  It’s  called  mindfulness on feeling,
<em>vedana-nupassana</em>. Just on the unpleasantness, not
the physical sensation on what our mind is complaining and whinging
about, just the unpleasantness. You can establish awareness on feeling.</p></li>
<li><p>If we want to have another look at this situation, we can look at our
mind,  the  third  foundation  of  mindfulness.  The
<em>citta-nupassana</em>.  We
can establish our awareness on the mind state, which is most probably
aversion. Aversion is that type of dissatisfied mind. We are bitten by
a  mosquito,  the  mind  is  full  of  aversion. That’s  the  third  foundation.
We can use that to establish our awareness on, to note and know that
present moment experience. To blow it apart with our awareness and
wisdom so that it is not used as the base for the arising of me, mine or
I. We don’t go into it and start to think, «Oh, my itchy arm. Why does
it happen to me all the time?»</p></li>
<li><p>We can establish our awareness on the fourth foundation of mindfulness,
<em>dhamma-nupassana</em>,  which  is  the  reaction  process,  the  thought
process,  the  karmically  active  process.  That’s  the  actively  pushing
away, that kind of energy of disliking, pushing. It’s also available to us
as a foundation for mindfulness.</p></li>
</ul>
<p>The physical sensation – the itchiness, or feeling – the pleasantness,
or the mind state – the aversion in the mind, or mind objects – our reaction
of disliking towards it. So in four ways we can become mindful of a present
moment experience. This is a very simple example. It happens moment after
moment, after moment. That is what our experience is. The five aggregates
arising  together  and  ceasing  together,  in  every  moment  of  our  conscious
experience,  there  will  be  a  physical  sensation,  there  will  be  some  feeling,
<span class="pdfpage">111</span>  there will be some mind state and there will be some reaction going on.</p>
<p>We are establishing our awareness stepping back from what is going
on. We are establishing awareness in the present moment so that we can see
things as they really are. When we can see things as they really are, we can
begin to let go of them. We do let go of them. If we are unable to do this,
then we’re just subjected to sensuality. If we’re unable to note and know in
the present moment, if we can’t activate our awareness and be aware of our
own mind states, then we have nothing else to do but simply follow along the
flow of craving wherever it takes us. We become the slave of craving. The
slave of our own mind. And the only way we know to escape from dukkha,
is through sensuality looking for something pleasant, something enjoyable,
forms cognizable by the eye, or sounds cognizable by the ear, sent cognized
through the nose, tastes cognized through the tongue, sensations cognized
through the body. That will be our only escape to our dukkha when it’s arising. Seeking out one of these things. The pleasure and joy that arises, dependent on the cords of sensual pleasure is simply called sensual pleasure. The
Buddha regarded it as a filthy pleasure, a false pleasure, an ignoble pleasure.
<em>«I say this kind of pleasure that it should not be pursued, that it should not</em>
<em>be developed, that it should not be cultivated, that it should be feared.»</em>
He
knew the danger this sensual pleasure leads to. It certainly doesn’t lead to
awakening. It leads to burying deep into samsara. We are delighting in the
cause of dukkha.</p>
<p>So  controlling  our  reactions  to  these  three  feelings,  the  pleasant,
unpleasant  and  the  neutral.  Neutral  feeling  probably  takes  up  98%  of  our
time.  There  is  maybe  1%  pleasantness  and  1%  unpleasantness.  But  those
little 1% are what we live for. Desiring something delightful and pleasant.
Trying to escape from the unpleasantness. If it’s slightly unpleasant we try to
change it, try to get rid of it, searching for something pleasant.</p>
<p>When  we  are  in  stress  or  a  difficult  situation  such  as  an  emotional
break-down, we go for a snack, chocolate, ice cream, or some other kind of
snack, just to try to distract ourselves from the dukkha that we got ourselves
in.  But  the  correct  strategy  is  to  use  awareness  and  wisdom,  to  note  and
know and let go. Don’t go looking for outside options to cure yourself. The
best cure we have, is right here, the mind and body process itself, awareness
<span class="pdfpage">112</span>  and wisdom.</p>
<p><em>So controlling our reactions to these three feelings through attention
and  observation  at  the  very  point  where  defilement  arises,  is  the  heart  of</em>
<em>mind training.</em>
That’s what we are doing here. We are training the mind in
non-reaction. This  does  not  mean  that  we  become  boring  or  a  rock  in  the
forest, sitting there completely unmoved and unchallenged by anything. Of
course, you can still have some fun in your life. The Buddha is not advocating the death of all fun, just don’t get attached to it. Or as Ajahn Chah says,
«you can enjoy as much salt as you like as long as you don’t find it salty».</p>
<p>So  we  restrain  our  senses. We  keep  an  observation  on  our  six  sense
doors. We are watching, we are noting, knowing and letting go each moment
activating our awareness and seeing what’s there. When we have activated
our awareness, there is always going to be an object. Either a physical object
or  a  mental  object  –  we  can  choose. All  we  have  to  do  is  to  maintain  our
awareness and wisdom. Awareness will take us to the object and penetrate it
clearly. Wisdom allows us to disengage from it and step out of the identification process. In that case it is let go of. Dukkha ceases. Dukkha ceases when
wisdom  removes  ignorance. When  wisdom  is  unable  to  uproot  ignorance,
then  the  flow  of  paticca  samuppada,  dependent  orientation,  must  result  in
dukkha. Awareness and wisdom do have the power over ignorance. If they
didn’t  have  the  power,  no-one  would  be  able  to  get  enlightened.  Because
they do have the power, it is possible that we can break free of this mind and
body process. We can allow it to do just what it does and we can enjoy the
space and freedom of consciousness, which is not addicted to the mind and
body process.</p>
</section>
</section>


            <div class="clearer"></div>
          </div>
      </div>
      <div class="clearer"></div>
    </div>
  </body>
</html>