<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
  <head>
    <meta charset="utf-8" />
    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0" /><meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1" />

    <title>18. Chanting</title>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="_static/pygments.css" />
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="_static/epub.css" />
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="_static/custom.css" /> 
  </head><body>

    <div class="document">
      <div class="documentwrapper">
          <div class="body" role="main">
            
  <section id="chanting">
<h1><span class="section-number">18. </span>Chanting</h1>
<section id="morning-chanting">
<h2><span class="section-number">18.1. </span>Morning Chanting</h2>
<iframe width="100%" height="120" src="https://www.mixcloud.com/widget/iframe/?feed=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.mixcloud.com%2Fanthonymarkwell%2Fmorning-chanting%2F&amp;hide_cover=1" frameborder="0"></iframe>
<p><span class="pdfpage">287</span>  <strong>Araham sammā-sambuddho bhagavā.</strong> <br />
The Blessed One is Worthy &amp; Rightly Self-awakened.</p>
<p><strong>Buddham bhagavantam abhivādemi.</strong> <br />
I bow down before the Awakened, Blessed One.</p>
<p>(BOW DOWN)</p>
<p><strong>Svākkhāto bhagavatā dhammo.</strong> <br />
The Dhamma is well-expounded by the Blessed One.</p>
<p><strong>Dhammam namassāmi.</strong> <br />
I pay homage to the Dhamma.</p>
<p>(BOW DOWN)</p>
<p><strong>Supatipanno bhagavato sāvaka-sangho.</strong> <br />
The Sangha of the Blessed One’s disciples has practiced well.</p>
<p><strong>Sangham namāmi.</strong> <br />
I pay respect to the Sangha.</p>
<p>(BOW DOWN)</p>
<section id="homage">
<h3><span class="section-number">18.1.1. </span>Homage</h3>
<p><span class="pdfpage">288</span></p>
<p><em>LEADER: Handa mayam buddhassa bhagavato pubba-bhāga-namakāram karoma se:</em> <br />
Now let us chant the preliminary passage in homage to the Awakened One, the Blessed One:</p>
<p><strong>Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa. <br />
Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa. <br />
Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa.</strong></p>
<p>Homage to the Blessed One, the Worthy One, the Rightly Self-Awakened One.</p>
</section>
<section id="going-for-refuge">
<h3><span class="section-number">18.1.2. </span>Going for Refuge</h3>
<p><span class="pdfpage">289</span> <em>LEADER: Handa mayam tisarana-gamana-pātham bhanāma se:</em> <br />
Now let us chant the passage going for refuge to the Triple Gem:</p>
<p><strong>Buddham saranam gacchāmi.</strong> <br />
I go to the Buddha for refuge.</p>
<p><strong>Dhammam saranam gacchāmi.</strong> <br />
I go to the Dhamma for refuge.</p>
<p><strong>Sangham saranam gacchāmi.</strong> <br />
I go to the Sangha for refuge.</p>
<p><strong>Dutiyampi buddham saranam gacchāmi.</strong> <br />
A second time, I go to the Buddha for refuge.</p>
<p><strong>Dutiyampi dhammam saranam gacchāmi.</strong> <br />
A second time, I go to the Dhamma for refuge.</p>
<p><strong>Dutiyampi sangham saranam gacchāmi.</strong> <br />
A second time, I go to the Sangha for refuge.</p>
<p><strong>Tatiyampi buddham saranam gacchāmi.</strong> <br />
A third time, I go to the Buddha for refuge.</p>
<p><strong>Tatiyampi dhammam saranam gacchāmi.</strong> <br />
A third time, I go to the Dhamma for refuge.</p>
<p><strong>Tatiyampi sangham saranam gacchāmi.</strong> <br />
A third time, I go to the Sangha for refuge.</p>
</section>
<section id="taking-the-eight-precepts">
<h3><span class="section-number">18.1.3. </span>Taking the Eight Precepts</h3>
<p><span class="pdfpage">290</span> <strong>Pānātipātā veramanī sikkhā-padam samādiyāmi.</strong> <br />
I undertake the training rule to refrain from taking life.</p>
<p><strong>Adinnādānā veramanī sikkhā-padam samādiyāmi.</strong> <br />
I undertake the training rule to refrain from stealing.</p>
<p><strong>Abrahma-cariyā veramanī sikkhā-padam samādiyāmi.</strong> <br />
I undertake the training rule to refrain from sexual intercourse.</p>
<p><strong>Musāvādā veramanī sikkhā-padam samādiyāmi.</strong> <br />
I undertake the training rule to refrain from telling lies.</p>
<p><strong>Surā-meraya-majja-pamādatthānā veramanī sikkhā-padam samādiyāmi.</strong> <br />
I undertake the training rule to refrain from intoxicating liquors &amp; drugs that lead to heedlessness.</p>
<p><strong>Vikāla-bhojanā veramanī sikkhā-padam samādiyāmi.</strong> <br />
I undertake the training rule to refrain from eating after noon &amp; before dawn.</p>
<p><strong>Nacca-gīta-vādita-visūka-dassanā mālā-gandha-vilepanadhārana-manḍana-vibhūsanatthānā veramanī sikkhā-padam samādiyāmi.</strong> <br />
I undertake the training rule to refrain from dancing, singing, music, watching shows, wearing garlands, beautifying myself with perfumes &amp; cosmetics.</p>
<p><strong>Uccāsayana-mahāsayanā veramanī sikkhā-padam samādiyāmi.</strong> <br />
I undertake the training rule to refrain from high &amp; luxurious seats &amp; beds.</p>
<p><strong>Imāni attha sikkhā-padāni samādiyāmi.</strong> [×3] <br />
I undertake these eight precepts.</p>
<p>(BOW THREE TIMES)</p>
</section>
</section>
<section id="evening-chanting">
<h2><span class="section-number">18.2. </span>Evening chanting</h2>
<iframe width="100%" height="120" src="https://www.mixcloud.com/widget/iframe/?feed=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.mixcloud.com%2Fanthonymarkwell%2Fevening-chanting%2F&amp;hide_cover=1" frameborder="0"></iframe>
<section id="recollection-of-the-buddha">
<h3><span class="section-number">18.2.1. </span>Recollection of the Buddha</h3>
<p><em>LEADER: Handa mayam Buddhānussati-nayam karoma se:</em> <br />
Now let us recite the guide to the recollection of the Buddha:</p>
<p><strong>Itipi so bhagavā araham sammā-sambuddho,</strong> <br />
He is a Blessed One, a Worthy One, a Rightly Self-awakened One,</p>
<p><strong>Vijjā-carana-sampanno sugato lokavidū,</strong> <br />
consummate in knowledge &amp; conduct, one who has gone the good way, knower of the worlds,</p>
<p><strong>Anuttaro purisa-damma-sārathi satthā deva manussānam buddho bhagavāti.</strong> <br />
unexcelled trainer of those who can be taught, teacher of human &amp; divine beings; awakened; blessed.</p>
</section>
<section id="recollection-of-the-dhamma">
<h3><span class="section-number">18.2.2. </span>Recollection of the Dhamma</h3>
<p><em>LEADER: Handa mayam Dhammānussati-nayam karoma se:</em>
Now let us recite the guide to the recollection of the Dhamma:</p>
<p><strong>Svākkhāto bhagavatā dhammo,</strong> <br />
The Dhamma is well-expounded by the Blessed One,</p>
<p><strong>Sanditthiko akāliko ehipassiko,</strong> <br />
to be seen here &amp; now, timeless, inviting all to come &amp; see,</p>
<p><strong>Opanayiko paccattam veditabbo viññūhīti.</strong> <br />
pertinent, to be seen by the observant for themselves.</p>
</section>
<section id="recollection-of-the-sangha">
<h3><span class="section-number">18.2.3. </span>Recollection of the Sangha</h3>
<p><span class="pdfpage">292</span> <em>LEADER: Handa mayam Sanghānussati-nayam karoma se:</em> <br />
Now let us recite the guide to the recollection of the Sangha:</p>
<p><strong>Su-patipanno bhagavato sāvaka-sangho,</strong> <br />
The Sangha of the Blessed One’s disciples who have practiced well,</p>
<p><strong>Uju-patipanno bhagavato sāvaka-sangho,</strong> <br />
the Sangha of the Blessed One’s disciples who have practiced
straightforwardly,</p>
<p><strong>Ñāya-patipanno bhagavato sāvaka-sangho,</strong> <br />
the Sangha of the Blessed One’s disciples who have practiced
methodically,</p>
<p><strong>Sāmīci-patipanno bhagavato sāvaka-sangho,</strong> <br />
the Sangha of the Blessed One’s disciples who have practiced masterfully,</p>
<p><strong>Yadidam cattāri purisa-yugāni attha purisa-puggalā:</strong> <br />
i.e., the four pairs—the eight types—of Noble Ones:</p>
<p><strong>Esa bhagavato sāvaka-sangho—</strong> <br />
That is the Sangha of the Blessed One’s disciples—</p>
<p><strong>Ahuneyyo pāhuneyyo dakkhineyyo añjali-karanīyo,</strong> <br />
worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of respect,</p>
<p><strong>Anuttaram puññakkhettam lokassāti.</strong> <br />
the incomparable field of merit for the world.</p>
</section>
<section id="the-sublime-attitudes">
<h3><span class="section-number">18.2.4. </span>The Sublime Attitudes</h3>
<section id="metta-loving-kindness">
<h4><span class="section-number">18.2.4.1. </span>Metta – Loving-Kindness</h4>
<p><span class="pdfpage">293</span> <strong>Sabbe sattā sukhitā hontu.</strong> <br />
May all living beings be happy.</p>
<p><strong>Sabbe sattā averā hontu.</strong> <br />
May all living beings be free from animosity.</p>
<p><strong>Sabbe sattā abyāpajjhā hontu.</strong> <br />
May all living beings be free from oppression.</p>
<p><strong>Sabbe sattā anīghā hontu.</strong> <br />
May all living beings be free from trouble.</p>
<p><strong>Sabbe sattā sukhī attānam pariharantu.</strong> <br />
May all living beings look after themselves with ease.</p>
</section>
<section id="karuna-compassion">
<h4><span class="section-number">18.2.4.2. </span>Karuna – Compassion</h4>
<p><strong>Sabbe sattā sabba-dukkhā pamuccantu.</strong> <br />
May all living beings be freed from all stress &amp; pain.</p>
</section>
<section id="mudita-sympathetic-joy">
<h4><span class="section-number">18.2.4.3. </span>Mudita – Sympathetic Joy</h4>
<p><strong>Sabbe sattā laddha-sampattito mā vigacchantu.</strong> <br />
May all living beings not be deprived of the good fortune they have attained.</p>
</section>
<section id="upekkha-equanimity">
<h4><span class="section-number">18.2.4.4. </span>Upekkha – Equanimity</h4>
<p><strong>Sabbe sattā kamma-ssakā kamma-dāyādā kamma-yonī kamma-bandhū kamma-patisaranā.</strong> <br />
All living beings are the owners of their actions, heir to their actions, born of their actions, related through their actions, and live dependent on their actions.</p>
<p><strong>Yam kammam karissanti kalyānam vā pāpakam vā tassa dāyādā bhavissanti.</strong> <br />
Whatever they do, for good or for evil, to that will they fall heir.</p>
</section>
</section>
</section>
</section>


            <div class="clearer"></div>
          </div>
      </div>
      <div class="clearer"></div>
    </div>
  </body>
</html>